CHAPTER SIX
Writing – a Great
Tool
“The idea is to write it so that people hear it and it slides through the brain
and goes straight to the heart.”
- MAYA ANGELOU
U
sually, you’ll find that language learning courses (except
writing courses) tend to spend quite a lot of time
instructing students in grammar and vocabulary, how
to read and listen... However, very few courses mention the
writing skill. And if they do, learners tend to skip the section.
Most learners assume that writing is a “high level” skill, and it is
70only devoted to those who are in advanced language classes.
When I was teaching English, most students who were
interested in this skill were seeking writing certificates, such as
TOEFL writing, IELTS writing...
If you have never paid attention to writing, I regret to say that
you have been ignoring one of the most powerful tools that can
help you quickly master a language. It can assist you in various
aspects of the learning process. In this chapter, I am going to
discuss a number of simple methods to exploit the benefits of
writing. You will see how writing can help you save what you
have learned into your long-term memory and why writing
can be a preliminary step to developing your speaking skills.
Everyday, after a session of practicing your reading and/or
listening skills, you need to spend time writing down anything
you can remember from that session. This is one of the best
ways to get extremely high effectiveness in learning a new
language. As you practice listening or reading, the common
words, phrases and structures are saved into your temporary
memory, which is also called short-term memory. If this
information is not saved into your long-term memory, a
majority of it will vanish by the next day. One of the best ways
to move this information from your short-term to long-term
memory is by recalling it. As you write, you will have to recall
what you have just read and listened to. You will have to pick
up words and arrange them in a proper way to build sentences.
By doing so, you start using and controlling your new language.
If you spend 15 – 20 minutes writing, you have a chance to
retain 80% – 90% of what you have just learned.
Another important role of writing is that it acts as a preliminary
step towards developing your speaking skills because, when you
are writing, you are actually doing a part of the speaking
process. As you know, humans have two basic ways to express
ideas—writing and speaking. These two methods have the same
first step, in which your brain initiates the following activities:
-
Selecting words
71-
Putting the selected words together in a proper way to
build sentences.
Therefore, when you can write comfortably, you have done
almost half of the speaking process.
In writing classes, teachers tend to focus on issues, such as
writing structures (opening, body, conclusion), logic, grammar
structures and so on. However, I am not talking about that type
of writing here. The writing practice that we are discussing here
has two basic goals. Firstly, it should reinforce the words and
phrases that you have got through listening and reading. And
secondly, it should pave the way for you to speak more easily.
Therefore, you will be writing in a free style, just like chatting
on Yahoo or Facebook.
What do you write? After reading or listening to a topic, try to
write anything you can remember or know about that topic.
You can describe briefly the information you have read or
listened to. While you are writing, do not worry about logic,
arguments or structure of your writing. Just try to write as much
as possible. As you write, you start to recall the most common
words and phrases in the learning material. The most important
thing about this technique is you are not allowed to use
dictionary. If you do not recall a word you need for a sentence,
try using another word or try a simpler way to express your idea
so that you do not have to use a dictionary. In case you still
cannot express the idea you want, skip it and move on to
another one. Often, when you first practice this writing method,
your product will likely be a whole bunch of messy sentences
and unrelated ideas. It is fine! It will improve as you know more
words and phrases and get familiar with sentence building.
There is only one case in which you can use your dictionary. It
is when you remember the word but do not remember exactly
how to spell it. If so, you can check the dictionary to spell it
correctly.
In the beginning, you will likely make a lot of mistakes.
Sometimes, you are not sure if you are writing a sentence
72properly or not. In that case, you need to accept making a
mistake and just go ahead as far as you can remember. Don’t go
for perfection! Again, if you want something to be perfect right
at the beginning, you will end up frustrated and are more likely
to give it up. It is just like when you learn dancing. It is very
difficult for you to follow the steps properly and, at the same
time, pose beautifully on the first day. You need to learn it step
by step. The same thing happens with learning a new language.
In the beginning, you may remember the main words. Then you
remember which preposition goes with which word. Gradually,
you can build a sentence correctly and quickly, and so on.
If you are still concerned that your writing is bad, even when
writing in your mother tongue, please note that I am not asking
you to write a piece of art work. Just write as you speak. Start
with 5 –10 sentences. Use simple sentences with one subject
and one object. Do not make things complicated with long
sentences.
If you are still wondering about what content you will put into
your writing, you can use the questions: Who? What? When?
How? Where? Why? What happens if...? How much...?
For example, let’s say you have just read a series of articles
about the oil spill in Mexico (I am quite sure that articles on this
topic are available in many languages). You can then write a
short piece on it by answering questions like:
- What happened? (an oil spill)
- Where and when did it happen?
- Who did it?
- When can people solve this problem?
- What happens if they cannot solve it quickly?
- What are the potential effects to the environment?
- What is your opinion?
- What is the best solution?
73and so on...
You can answer the above questions by using simple and short
sentences. If you have a complicated idea, break it down into
several short sentences. There! You have your article (or journal
or whatever you call it).
In fact, many learners know the important role of writing in
learning a new language. But they start to feel bored after
practicing it for a few days. It is understandable because writing
just for you to read is really boring; you have no motivation. It
will be different if you share your information to the world out
there. As you share it, you communicate with others your ideas,
opinions or problems. Therefore, you should not just write on
to a piece of paper only to throw it away or save your writing in
some corner of your computer. Try sharing your writing with
others, so they can see how quickly you improve each day.
Below are some effective ways:
- Blogging: If you are writing your blog in your mother
tongue, give it one more entry to write in your target
language about the content you have just learned within the
day. Of course, you are free to write about anything else you
want. Make these entries public so that everyone can see it.
- E-mail: If you don’t want to write a blog, you can simply e-
mail your writing to your friends, your language teacher, and
especially your foreign friends who are native speakers of
your target language. If you don’t have such a foreign friend
yet, you should start to make friends with some. If you
don’t know how, I will talk about it in Chapter 10.
- Write and post on forums: If you have joined some
language learning forum, you can post your writing there.
Language learning forums have the advantage that you
could receive support and motivation from those who have
the same goal as you. However, it has the disadvantage that
it is not dedicated to any specific topic. When its only focus
is language issues, it might become boring, too. You can,
instead, write and post on a forum that focuses more on the
74topic that you have just learned. For example, on the topic
“Mexico oil spill” mentioned above, you can go and search
on the Internet for environment forums. Of course, you
need to search for forums in your target language. Then,
you can post your opinion on the topic in the target
language. Don’t worry about your current writing or
language skills. Basically, every forum welcomes content.
The more content you post, the more they like you. When
you join and post on a forum, people might reply to you or
write comments. In that way, you would be really
communicating in your target language. This process
gives you motivation and excitement to write more (to reply
to your audience). By doing so with native speakers, you can
quickly improve your vocabulary, word choice and sentence
building skills... If you still remember, in Chapter 4 I
mentioned topic specific forums as a source where you can
practice your Free reading technique. If you are using this
source for your reading, you can practice writing by simply
posting your thoughts to the forum. Even if you do not
have enough vocabulary to write a long post yet, try to post
a few sentences to proactively join the communication.
-
Build the habit of writing in your target
language any time you can: This is also very
powerful. Try to use your target language when you write
your own work plan, or when you take notes or anything
else. It helps you immerse yourself more into the target
language. Please note that you don’t need to write
everything in the target language. Doing so might be hard
for you. If your vocabulary is still small, you can mix your
mother tongue anytime you don’t know a word in your
target language.
In my experience, sometimes learners are quite reluctant to post
their writing on their blog or on a forum. They are afraid that
their foreign language skills are not good enough to be made
public. So procrastination and fear of criticism is something you
should be aware of. If you do not want to post because you’re
afraid someone might criticize your foreign language skills, let
75me ask you this question: “If someone does criticize you, what
difference will it make to your skills?” Nothing, right? Your
foreign language skills cannot be changed because of someone
else’s thoughts, but it certainly can be changed by your
thoughts. If you act boldly, things will change. When it comes
to learning a new language, you can be sure that there is no
activity that can make your skills worse; all activities can only
improve it to a great or small extent. It is only bad when you do
not do anything, so please don’t worry about any negative
comments and practice your writing confidently.
76CHAPTER SEVEN
Develop Your
Speaking Skills
“If there is no struggle, there is no progress.”
- FREDERICK DOUGLASS
O
ne of the biggest reasons why a language learner
cannot speak fluently is that he does not practice
speaking. Speaking seems to be the hardest part of
learning a new language. Somehow, many learners hesitate to
speak. It is understandable. First and foremost, speaking is not a
simple process. To express an idea verbally, the speaker has to
coordinate various parts of his body from the brain to the
77tongue, the mouth, the lips, the breath and so on. You may not
be aware of this complexity with your mother tongue because
you have already overcome it when you were a child. If you
recall the time you first practiced riding a bicycle, you will see
how awkward you were when you tried to coordinate your eyes
(to see the road), your hands (to control the handlebars) and
your feet (to control the pedals). It took you a certain amount
of time practicing it over and over again to make it go smoothly.
But once you mastered it, you rode freely without consciously
coordinating your body parts. It now happens automatically.
The same thing happens when you first try to speak in a new
language. You may fumble and feel awkward in selecting words.
You may not be sure how to put them together properly. You
may not be able to get your body parts to work together exactly
as you want. This fact may frustrate you and make you hesitant
in speaking up.
Another reason why learners are reluctant to speak is they are
afraid of making mistakes. In fact, everyone faces this fear at
different levels. Psychologists call it the “fear of failure”. If you
notice, this fear exists everywhere. For example, when I was a
child, many times I knew the answer to a question asked by the
teacher, but I did not dare to speak up. Maybe, you have
experienced a similar situation. Every time, you start doing
something new, such as invent a new machine, compose a new
song or start a business, you would face this fear of failure. So
what do you do to overcome it? Ralph Waldo Emerson said:
“Do the thing you fear, and the death of fear is certain”. I
cannot agree more; just go ahead and speak up.
Sometimes, people just do not know where to start. Maybe,
they do not know who to talk to and what to talk about. In
Vietnam, those who want to learn English are always struggling
to find a “speaking environment” where they can practice their
new language skills. Many of them spend their hard-earned
money to join expensive language classes where foreigners are
hired to talk to them.
78We will solve the above problems step by step. But the most
important thing is that if you want to be able to speak in a new
language, you have to speak, at any price!
How many words do you need in order to
speak well?
Most language learners tend to delay practicing their speaking
until they feel that their vocabulary foundation is solid enough.
“My grammar is still bad”, “I know very few words”... are
some of the common excuses I usually hear. The thing is they
cannot determine how much grammar and vocabulary is
“enough”. Therefore, speaking tends to be delayed forever. So,
how much vocabulary do you actually need in order to speak a
language fluently? Let’s take a look at the following example:
Writing article no. 1:
***
A business plan serves two purposes: It's an organizing tool for you, to help you
simplify and clarify your business goals and strategy. And it's also a document
that sells your business idea and demonstrates that your product or service can
make a profit and attract funding.
"A completed and well-thought-out business plan also acts as a touchstone or
litmus test against the reality of your business operations once you open its doors. It
should be a guidebook for your business...telling you what you should be doing
and how well you're doing it," says Frank Fiore, author of Write a Business Plan
in No Time (Que Publishing). "A business plan also acts as a dry run for your
business even before it starts. It's actually a written description of your business'
future."
As a selling tool, your business plan should sell others on your business and give
you confidence that your hard-earned money will be well-spent on an idea that can
succeed. Over the long term, your plan is likely to be read by potential investors,
lenders, strategic partners, and even management candidates, Fiore says.
79The Vital Ingredient
As such, it certainly should reflect your company's unique style and sales
proposition, says Linda Pinson, a business-plan software developer and author of
Anatomy of a Business Plan (Dearborn Trade Publishing).
"A business plan doesn't have to be dry at all. The whole idea is to write
statements that are powerful and tell who you are. If you want to get across that
your company will be a fun and valuable place, your business plan should reflect
that," Pinson says. "There's nothing that precludes you from building your
personality into the business plan. In fact, if you're the vital ingredient, and you
fail to inject yourself and what you're bringing to the business, it won't be a proper
business plan."
Although the text you write can build in a playful but smart tone that presents
your style, remember not to skimp on the numbers and charts that are essential to
proving your concept. "When it comes to the financial part of your plan, that's
where you'll take the personality out and let the numbers speak for themselves.
They should reflect what you said in the text and translate that tone into the
revenues your company can earn," Pinson says. Good luck!
***
Now, I am going to rephrase the content above in everyday
speaking style with simple words and sentences. See the
transcript below:
Speaking transcript no. 1:
***
Today, we are going to talk about a business plan, what it is and how to make a
good one.
So, why do you need a business plan? Well, there are basically two reasons for
that. Firstly, it is a tool. It helps you be clear about what you are going to do with
your business. When you write things down, everything is going to be very clear, for
example, what your goals are, what your strategy to achieve your goals is and so
80on. Secondly, if you want to have other people put money into your business, a
business plan will tell them about your idea, your products or services and how you
can make profit for them. Of course, they want to get profit in the future;
otherwise, they won’t put their money into your business, right?
If you write your business plan carefully, you can use it to compare with reality
when you are actually running the business. It tells you where to go, what to do
and how well you are doing your business. A business plan will also help you
rehearse before you start. It is actually a written description of your business future.
As a selling tool, your business plan shows other people how you (and they) would
be able to make money with the business. In the future, the plan might be read by
those who want to put money into your business, such as a bank or a fund.
Because of these reasons, a business plan should tell you about the style of the
business. And it has to answer the question: “What is the selling point?” A
business plan doesn’t have to be dry at all. The idea is to write something powerful
and to tell who you are. If you want to tell people that your company will be fun
and valuable, you should talk about that in your business plan. You are free to
put your personality into your plan. In fact, if you are an important part of the
business, you should include yourself in the plan.
Even though you can have your own writing style in the business plan, please
remember that numbers and charts are very important to show people why your
business idea will really work. When it comes to the financial part of your plan,
that's where you'll take the personality out and let the numbers speak for
themselves. Those numbers need to support what you said earlier and tell people
how much your company will make.
***
When comparing Writing article no. 1 and Speaking transcript
no. 1, you will find that a greater number of different words is
used in the Writing article than in the transcript. In the article,
there are 168 different words. In the transcript, this number is
147. At the first look, these two numbers are not very different.
However, a non-native English speaker would find that the
transcript uses simpler words than in the article. To make this
point clearer, let’s take a look at one more example below.
81Writing article no. 2:
***
More than half of all U.S. businesses are based at home. These companies often
are dismissed as quaint hobbyist ventures, but new research suggests that's a
mistake. An estimated 6.6 million home-based enterprises provide at least half of
their owners' household income. Together these "homepreneurs" employ one in 10
private-sector workers, and by many measures they're just as competitive as their
counterparts in commercial spaces.
Ask Stephen Labuda, the 35-year-old president of Agency3, a Web development
firm he runs from his home in Cambridge, Mass. A former programmer at
Deutsche Bank (DB), Labuda started building Web sites as a side job in 2003
and took the venture full time three years later. Agency3's revenue is in the
millions, and Labuda is about to hire his fifth employee, who will work remotely,
like the rest of the staff and the slew of contractors he taps. "I'm not intending to
go rent office space," he says.
You can trace the rise of home-based businesses to the early days of telecommuting
in the 1980s and the mass adoption of the Internet in the 1990s. Cloud
computing, online collaboration, and smartphones have accelerated the trend, and
recent research clarifies the economic significance of companies like Labuda's.
"We're seeing more and more home-based businesses that are real businesses," says
Steve King, who coauthored the new report with his wife, Carolyn Ockels. (The
couple runs Emergent Research, a small research and consulting shop, from their
home in Lafayette, Calif.) The pair analyzed U.S. Census data and Small
Business Administration research, along with data from the Small Business
Success Index, a survey of 1,500 companies sponsored by Network Solutions and
the University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith School of Business.
In some of these companies, the operations are concentrated in the owner's home.
Others use their residence as a headquarters but do most of their work at clients'
homes or offices. The variety of home-based businesses cuts across industries, but
the top sectors are business and professional services, construction, retail, and
personal services.
A few trends are driving the growth of sophisticated home businesses. First,
technology has made it easier to start and run a business from anywhere. But just
as important, there has been a change of consciousness in the business world to
recognize home-based enterprises as legitimate.
82Labuda has seen that shift at Agency3. "When I first started, I really felt
compelled to go rent an office. I felt like in order for me to be taken seriously as a
business, I had to have an office that my clients could come to," he says. It didn't
matter—clients didn't want to visit him. Labuda meets most of them at their
businesses or at coffee shops. He also uses on-demand office space, where he can
rent a conference room by the hour, if needed.
Now, Labuda never feels that his working from home damages Agency3's
credibility. Instead, it's a selling point. "It's reflected in our pricing that we don't
have the same kind of infrastructure costs and fixed costs that some of our
competitors do," he says.
King predicts that as large companies try to reduce their fixed costs by outsourcing
business functions, small home-based enterprises will play an even larger role in the
economy. "Over the next 20 to 30 years, you could see the percentage of people who
are self-employed and home-based double, potentially," he says.
***
And below is the transcript in everyday talking style.
Speaking transcript no. 2:
***
More than half of all U.S. businesses are based at home. People often think that
these companies are not serious. Many even think that they are doing it for fun.
That’s not true! There are about 6.6 million companies like these in the US, and
their owners are making really good money. Half of their family income is actually
coming from these home-based businesses. One in ten employees of private
companies in the US are working for home-based businesses. In fact, research
shows that these types of businesses are just as competitive as companies working
out of office buildings.
Stephen Labuda is the 35-year-old owner of Agency3. He has a website building
company running at his home in Cambridge, Massachussets. He used to work for
Deutsch Bank. Labuda started building websites as a side job in 2003. He
started his company three years later. The business is now making millions of
dollars, and Labuda is going to get his fifth employee. Just like the company’s
owners, many employees in Agency3 do not work at the company office; they can
83work from home or anywhere they want to. The new employee is going to do the
same. Labuda says that he is not going to have an office.
The number of home-based businesses increased very fast in the 1980s. As people
used the Internet more and more in the 1990s, the numbers kept increasing even
faster. “We are seeing more and more home-based businesses that are real
businesses”, says Steve King. Steve King and his wife did a study using data from
the US Census, Small Business Administration and Small Business Success
Index. They also used data from the survey of 1500 companies by Network
Solutions and the University Maryland's Robert H. Smith School of Business.
In some of these companies, they do most of the work at the owner’s home. Others
use their home as headquarters and do most of the work at the customers’ home or
offices. These home-based companies are normally business and professional
services, construction, retail, and personal services.
Because of many reasons, there are now more and more home-based businesses.
Firstly, technology has made it easier to start and run a business from anywhere.
Secondly, people have changed their thinking about this type of businesses.
Labuda has seen that change at Agency3. “When I first started, I did want to
rent an office. I was thinking that to make my business look serious, I need an
office that my customers could come to”, he says. But in fact, it was not that
important. His customers did not want to go to see him. He normally goes to see
them at their offices or in a café. Labuda also uses office service that he can pay by
the hour, if needed.
Now, Labuda thinks that working at home does not affect his credibility. In fact,
it is a good selling point. “As we don’t have an office, we can lower our costs
compared to other companies that are running in office buildings”, he says.
Steve King thinks that big companies now want to reduce their costs by having
other companies do some parts of their work for them. And these parts of work
can be done by home-based companies. That is why there will be more and more
new home-based businesses. The number might increase two times in the next 20
or 30 years.
***
After reading Writing article no. 2, you will find that there are
quite a few words (195 to be exact) that had not appeared in
Writing article no. 1. In other words, there are 362 different
84words in total taking the two articles together, while in Speaking
transcript no. 2, we have got only 78 new words compared to
transcript no. 1. It means there are only 225 different words in
total between the two transcripts.
What you can observe here is that the number of new words
keeps increasing over the articles. On the contrary, this number
sharply decreases between the two speaking transcripts. In this
book, I only show two typical examples in order not to waste
your time. However, when I actually did this experiment with a
few more examples, I got a pattern as below.
Number of words
used
Writing
Speaking
Amount of content to be expressed
What does this figure tell you? It tells you that in order to
express your ideas you don’t necessarily need to know a lot of
different words. As illustrated in the figure above, you need to
know a certain number of words in order to speak fluently. But
this number may not be as large as you thought because you can
85use the same words over and over again to describe different
contents. I have not counted exactly how many English words I
normally use. But in my estimation, when I talk to my overseas
partners using my second language, I use somewhere between
600 – 700 words, whether it is a face-to-face meeting or a
teleconference call. Yet, I can discuss fluently everything from
introducing my new projects to negotiating a deal.
It is true that in order to read and listen to something, you need
a lot more vocabulary than when you speak. It is because when
native speakers write articles or speak on the television, they
tend to use various synonyms to make their works sound more
compelling. In the example above, you can see that the author
has used four different words meaning the same—company, firm,
enterprise, business — while I would normally use only company or
business. Your question then may be: “If I have to learn and
know 3000 words of the core vocabulary anyway, why would I
use only six or seven hundred?” Well, the answer is already
there in your question. There is a gap between “knowing” and
“using”. To make it clearer, being able to “recognize” a word
and being able to “use” it proficiently are different stories.
Being able to “use” a word is at a more advanced level than
“recognizing” it. That is why many language learners can read
and hear proficiently but are still very bad at speaking. Such a
situation shows that these learners can “recognize” a certain
number of words but are not yet able to “use” them. They have
not “mastered” the words yet. Unfortunately, most learners do
not know this. They tend to think that they fail to speak fluently
because they do not know enough words. As a result, they try to
learn more and more words without knowing that doing so will
not help them to speak more fluently. When I share this idea
with my students, many realize that their vocabulary is actually
quite large already. I am not exaggerating when I say that the
ability to speak a new language fluently has already been there
inside them, just waiting to take off. If you are one of them,
congratulations! You will soon be able to speak fluently by
practicing the techniques I am going to tell you shortly.
86Fluent speaking and great pronunciation are
two different stories
Before explaining what the above headline really means, let’s
review what we have understood up until now. Firstly, I have
introduced you to “core vocabulary” and have instructed you
how to acquire it via reading and listening. Then, we discussed
the writing tool and its role in developing your speaking skills.
In the first half of this chapter, you have learned that you can
speak without having to know too many words but you must be
proficient with the words you do know. Now, we are going to
move on to the next level— the level at which you can speak
fluently and confidently, a level that many language learners may
struggle for years to achieve. You won’t have to get a headache
trying to find the right words anymore; you will speak in a
comfortable way.
The title of this section may have already given you a hint about
what’s coming up. Yes, the biggest thing that prevents learners
from developing their speaking skills is that they do not know
how to break down the problem into simpler steps. They do
not realize that fluency and pronunciation are two
different stories. I discovered this when I was learning to
dance. And I discovered something in common between
learning to speak a new language and learning to dance. When I
watched people dance, I wondered how so many people could
be sliding beautifully on the dance floor while I was struggling
with those basic steps. One day, I joined a Cha Cha course. As
you might know, this Latin dance requires flexible hip motions.
Surprisingly, the instructor told us (me and other learners) to
bend our elbows with hands on hips in an akimbo. Then, he
instructed us to follow the Cha Cha steps, which is 1, 2, cha cha
cha; 1, 2, cha cha cha... While we were doing the steps, he
required us not to move our hips at all and to raise our legs high
as if we were soldiers walking in a parade. On the first day, we
practiced this “parade Cha Cha dance” on the teacher’s count
and then with music. For the entire first day, he did not teach us
any hip movements. But by the end of the day, we were able to
follow the steps correctly according to the music while talking
87to each other at the same time. We could dance freely (the
“parade Cha Cha”) without worrying about the steps at all.
The next day, the teacher started to instruct us how to move
our hips without stepping. So we just stood on our spot and
practiced our hip motions. At the end of the day, he spent 10
minutes instructing us how to do the hip moves with the
“parade Cha Cha” that we learned the previous day. It was
amazing how we could dance — somewhat close to what those
professional dancers usually did on the television. Explaining
his method, the teacher said that it would have been very
difficult for a beginner to practice both stepping and hip
moving at the same time. Learners would likely be distracted,
and they might step incorrectly if they were worrying about
their hip movements and vice versa. Their feet would do the
wrong steps, they’d fail to catch up with the rhythm of the
music, and they’d pose awkwardly. “Following proper steps and
moving hips beautifully are different stories”, he concluded.
Now, let’s come back to our topic. The same thing happens
when we speak a new language. As I mentioned before, you
have to do two tasks when you speak:
- Firstly, your brain has to find suitable words and put
them into a proper order to build a correct sentence.
- Secondly, you have to coordinate your mouth, your lips,
your tongue... in order to pronounce the sentence
beautifully.
Right after the very first sounds are released, your ears hear
them and immediately you think: “Oh! It seems that I am not
pronouncing very well!” Unconsciously, this thought has a
negative impact on the first process so that you are distracted
from selecting and sorting your words. In turn, this distraction
interferes with your second process and makes your mouth,
your tongue and your lips move less smoothly. As a result, you
end up picking wrong words, putting them in a wrong order
and failing to pronounce properly.
88To solve this problem, we will apply a method which is similar
to the “parade Cha Cha” described above. I call it the 3-step
speaking technique. Like other techniques that I have shared
with you, this one is also very simple to follow. With this
technique, you will develop your speaking skills in three steps.
Step 1: Develop your fluency
In this step, you will be working only on your fluency. Its core
concept is that you need to set aside the pronunciation issue
when you speak. When practicing your speaking, you do not
need to worry about your pronunciation. Just speak the way you
feel comfortable the most. Think about the “parade Cha Cha
dance”. You can speak with the accent of your mother tongue if
you want. You do not have to worry whether you put the stress
properly or not. In short, you will fully focus on selecting the
right words and putting them into the right order. Some
people might wonder if this speaking style could affect their
pronunciation in the future. My answer is: “No, it won’t.” I
have used this technique myself and have shared it with
hundreds of my students. I’ve not seen any negative impact on
our pronunciation.
If you recall what I shared with you about writing in Chapter 6,
you will see that this step is the very next step after writing. As
you write, you pick up words and put them in an order. Now,
you just do the same process, but instead of writing, you will
speak it out aloud. It does not look very difficult, does it?
Step 2: Practice your pronunciation separately
In this step, you will focus more on polishing your
pronunciation. Of course, you don’t need to put this step on
hold until you are proficient in Step 1. You can practice the two
steps in the same period of time. But keep in mind that we have
to separate the two processes in order to develop the speaking
skill effectively. To focus only on pronunciation and set aside
the sentence building process, you can practice reading aloud
rather than speaking spontaneously. When you read, the
89sentences are already there; you don’t need to worry about
selecting words and putting them into a correct order. This
makes it much easier for you to develop your pronunciation
skills. In the next chapter, I will talk more about how to
pronounce like a native speaker.
Step 3: Put the two things together.
As you must have already guessed, after building sentences
comfortably and acquiring a pretty good pronunciation, it is
time to put them together. Of course, it is easier said than done.
But you need to be determined to practice hard, and you’ll
achieve the results quickly.
If you look back at all the previous chapters, you will see a
framework that I have built up in a step-by-step manner. The
framework can be described as following:
1. Acquire the most common words and phrases by the
Free reading and Sound-mapping listening techniques.
2. Start the first stage of speaking by practicing your free
writing. The more you practice, the more quickly you
will be able to pick up words and sort them into a
proper order.
3. Develop your fluency first by practicing speaking
without worrying about pronunciation. If you can write
it down, you can speak it out.
4. Develop your pronunciation skills separately by
practicing reading aloud.
5. Polish your speaking with pronunciation.
As you can see, speaking a new language looks difficult, but as
we break the task into easier steps, it looks very doable, doesn’t
it? Now, you might be tempted to jump to the next chapter to
see how you can pronounce like a native speaker. Just hold on;
we need to discuss a few questions a little bit more – Where do
you practice your interactive speaking? Who do you talk to?
What do you talk about?
90Who to talk to, where and what about?
Living in Vietnam, I have myself experienced quite a lot of
obstacles learning English. Unlike in multi-cultural countries, it
is hard to see someone who can speak English fluently in
Vietnam. It was hard for me to find someone with whom I
could practice my second language. Leaving the evening
language classes, English learners hunger for a chance to
practice. In the following pages, I am going to show you why
opportunities to practice your target language are always close
to you.
Self talk—the secret weapon
Most people believe that they need someone in front of them to
practice speaking. That is why very few learners practice
themselves at home. Sometimes, when learners cannot find a
native speaker to talk to, they may start practicing with each
other. I have not done any research to judge the effectiveness of
practicing speaking among non-native speakers. I believe that
doing something is always better than not doing anything.
However, I am very sure about the effectiveness of practicing
with oneself. It even has some advantages over practicing with a
native speaker.
Firstly, when you speak to someone, unconsciously, you are
under the pressure of time. You would be concerned whether
you are making your audience wait too long for you to speak
out some words. As a result, you would try to speak faster. This
will negatively affect the sentence building process in your
mind. You would also be under pressure trying not to make
mistakes in both grammar and pronunciation. In case your
audience does not understand what you are speaking, you would
especially lose confidence.
Secondly, when you practice with someone, you do not fully
control the content of your conversation. It might be driven by
your partner. As a result, the conversation may have nothing to
do with practicing the new words and phrases you’ve learned.
91On the contrary, when you practice with yourself, you are under
no pressure. You can fully control the content and topic in
order to optimize the previous learning sessions (which may be
reading, listening or writing).
Your obvious question here will be: “If I practice with myself,
who will fix my mistakes?” Your concern is reasonable.
However, this problem is not easy to solve even if you are
practicing with a native speaker. When you make a mistake,
your partner would probably not correct it; he would only try to
understand what you are talking about. Many native speakers
even believe that correcting a non-native speaker is impolite,
unless you’ve hired them to specifically fix your mistakes. But
then, it is quite costly to do so. In addition, many linguists
believe that correcting learners’ errors too much might de-
motivate them from speaking. The solution here is to practice
without worrying too much about making mistakes. As you
improve, the number of errors will decrease.
So, how do you practice self-talk? Right after a writing practice
session, as I instructed in Chapter 6, try to speak out loud what
you have just read, listened to, and written. Just like when you
practice writing, do not check your dictionary and accept
mistakes. Try to speak loudly and don’t worry about
pronunciation yet. Every time you don’t know what to say,
think about the questions who, what, when, how, where, why...
Remember to apply Step no. 1 in the 3-step technique described
earlier. The goal of this stage is to help you develop your
fluency.
Make your learning process more interesting
Just like when you practice writing, speaking will become very
boring if you don’t have some kind of interaction or sharing
with someone else. Therefore, you need to record or videotape
your speeches and share them with other people. Of course,
you don’t need to act as a professional speaker. You also don’t
need an expensive camera; just a webcam or a cheap
microphone will do. You can post your video or audio to some
92language learning forum so that people can help correct your
errors. More importantly, you can keep track of your everyday
improvement, and that is a huge motivation. In my experience,
people are more interested in videos than in audios. So, please
don’t be shy. One of my favorite websites to post my video is
Youtube. The beautiful thing about Youtube is that it has a very
high rate of comments and replies; you should try it out.
To make your language practice more meaningful and less
boring, try to make them valuable in terms of content. For
example, if you are good at using Photoshop (a software to edit
photos), think about posting a video in which you speak in your
target language instructing others how to edit a photograph.
You might receive comments and compliments like: “That’s
awesome!” or “Your clip is really useful, thank you!” Someone may
even ask: “Could you please tell me more about...” It will make you
much more excited about learning your new language.
Practice with an article written in your mother tongue
This is a very effective technique in case you have nothing to
talk about. Simply select some page of a book or an article
written in your mother tongue that has something to do with
the reading, listening or writing session that you have done for
the day. Then, you practice by telling others what is in the
article using your target language. When you practice this
technique, please keep in mind that you are not translating the
article from your mother tongue to your target language. You
are also not allowed to use a dictionary. You need to force
yourself to use all the words you know to express what’s in the
article so that your audience could understand what it talks
about. You don’t need to deliver the exact content. Just try to
describe it in your target language as closely as you can. The
power of this technique is that you don’t need to worry about
what to say when practicing. So the learning process is less
bothersome and more enjoyable. Please note that you don’t
need a real person in front of you in order to practice this
method. I used to practice it with my puppy. What I did is I
93bought a Harry Potter book in English to practice my reading;
then, I bought the audio version of this book to practice
listening; and finally, I bought a Vietnamese version of this
book to practice my speaking. Every time I told the story to my
puppy, he looked very excited ☺. Whether or not he was
excited, my English improved dramatically.
By now, you will have got a hang of my whole language learning
process. Let’s imagine that in the morning you read 4 – 5
articles about the mortgage crisis; in the afternoon, you listen to
the news about that crisis; then, you visit some finance forum
and write a post discussing the topic, and finally, you post a
video on Youtube to express your opinion about the problem.
What do you think will happen? I am very confident in saying
that, after you’ve done all this, you will have mastered words,
such as debt, loan, asset, mortgage, bank, crisis, economy, negative impact,
losing jobs, unemployment... and so on. You will also soon be able
to speak fluently!
94CHAPTER EIGHT
Polish Your
Pronunciation
“Whether you believe you can do a thing or not, you are right.”
- HENRY FORD
T
his could be the part that most of you have been waiting
for. In this chapter, I am going to tell you why
someone’s pronunciation is good but someone else’s is
not. In fact, there are many people who still have poor
pronunciation, even though they have got a chance to go to the
country of native speakers. In the following pages, we are going
to discover the important factors that make a language learner
pronounce well and how you could practice pronunciation.
95Pronunciation is always a hot topic that language learners are
interested in. When people hear a foreigner speaking their
language, they usually judge his speaking skills based on his
pronunciation. There may also be disputes among learners
about how to properly pronounce certain words. However,
before we go further into details, let me ask you a question: “In
which area do people pronounce English the most perfectly?”
Is it North America, UK or Australia? Pronunciation even
varies among native speakers living in different areas of one
country, which is referred to as local accents. In Vietnam, there
are at least 5 – 6 different local accents. Some of them are really
difficult to follow even for a Vietnamese native speaker like me.
This is true of many other languages in the world. As you can
see, it is hard to define “perfect pronunciation” for a language.
We may not be “perfect” even with our own mother tongue. As
the world becomes flatter, people are more tolerant of
imperfect pronunciation. When I was studying in the US, there
were three teachers who were non-native English speakers—
one of them was a Chinese, another a Czech and the third was
from South Africa. They all spoke with very heavy accents. But
it seemed not to affect their credibility at all. The reason why I
am telling you this story is that seeking perfection is not a good
idea; rather seek improvement.
Sound stressing – the basic element of good
pronunciation
When I was working at my old company that did global trading
business, I had a chance to work with many Singaporians and
Indians. What was interesting to me was that, although these
people spoke English with very heavy accents, Americans still
understood them quite easily. On the contrary, they seemed to
have difficulty understanding Vietnamese people speaking
English. Observing Singaporians and Indians speaking English,
I found the reason behind this difference. The basic factor here
is sound stressing (or sound emphasizing). English
uses stress or emphasis on sounds to differentiate words—for
96example, conTENT and CONtent are different words with very
different meanings, and the only indication is the placement of
stress or emphasis. Stress wrongly and the listener will not be
able to make out which word you’re saying. I found that even
though my Singaporian and Indian partners pronounced several
sounds incorrectly, they still kept stressing the sounds properly.
Vietnamese and Chinese have a different system altogether.
Like in music, these languages use pitch variation to
differentiate words. There are five different “pitches” in
Vietnamese and four different “pitches” in Chinese. Due to this
difference between his mother tongue and English, when a
Vietnamese speaks English, he tends to address the sound
stressing improperly. A similar problem may happen when an
American learns to speak Chinese. Shifting from stress variation
to pitch variation will be rather difficult for him.
Sound stressing directly creates intonation. When we
stress sounds properly, it will naturally create a specific up and
down pattern for the sentence we are pronouncing, which is
referred to as intonation. If the stressing of sounds is wrong,
the intonation then will be different. Intonation creates the
melody of a language. Intonation of sentences and
pronunciation of words are the two basic factors that help the
audience recognize what we are saying.
Sound stressing has a direct impact on the quality
of your word pronunciation. In order to pronounce a
word correctly, you need to get three factors correct—the
vowels, the consonants and the stresses. As mentioned earlier,
incorrect sound stressing can change a word totally.
Sound stressing helps you speak at the native
speaker’s speed. If you address the stress properly, you can
speak with a native speaker’s speed. When I was learning
English, I wondered how Americans could speak so fast. Then I
found that in each sentence they would emphasize some word
and quickly slide through some other words, even skipping
some words entirely. If they were to pronounce every single
word, they would not be able to speak so fast. Many language
97teachers recommend their students not to speak fast. I think it
is right when we talk to a foreigner. In that case, our goal is to
make sure the audience can understand us. Therefore, we need
to speak slowly and clearly. However, the story is different
when we practice with ourselves. In my experience, trying to
catch up with the native speaker’s speed brings two benefits:
- Firstly, it helps us better our listening skills because
speaking fast helps us get familiar with the normal speed
of the native speakers. If we can speak as fast as they
do, we will more likely be able to hear and understand
them.
- Secondly, practicing at the native speaker’s speed forces
you to address the sound stressing correctly. When we
speak slowly, we will tend to have no stressing at all. But
as we try to catch up the speed, we will naturally mimic
the intonation at the same time.
As you see, with proper sound stressing, you will have all three
factors: quality of word pronunciation, intonation and speed.
How to practice your sound stressing?
Since sound stressing is so important, I have developed steps
for you to practice it. You will need to set aside around 30
minutes. Select 5 to 10 sentences in a listening material.
Depending on your ability, you can practice with fewer or more
sentences. Since I do not know what language you are aiming to
learn, I will use my example when I was learning English to
illustrate the steps. Let’s say we are going to practice with the
sentence: “I am trying to solve this financial problem”. The steps are
as follows:
Step 1: Underline the stressed sounds.
I’m trying to solve this financial problem.
Step 2: Listen to the tape.
98Pay attention to how the speaker stresses these sounds. If you
hear a sound stressed more strongly than other stressed sounds,
it could be the stress for the whole sentence. Please underline
(or bold) that sound. For example: I’m trying to solve this financial
problem.
Step 3: Imitate exactly what the speaker says.
Try to imitate as closely as you can. Stress where the speaker
stresses, raise your voice where the speaker raises his voice, skip
the words that the speaker skips... Practice several times until
you can pronounce the whole sentence smoothly and properly.
Do not look at the transcript. Forget everything you have
learned about those words in the sentence; just imitate the
speaker.
Step 4: Try to catch up with the speaker’s speed.
As mentioned above, this is a key to developing a native
speaking voice. In this step, you will rewind the tape several
times and try to catch up with the speaker’s speed. Try to match
your sound to the speaker’s sound so that you start when he
starts and stop as he stops. The very first attempts may be quite
difficult. If so, you can skip the non-stressed sounds entirely
and only speak out the stressed sounds. With the above
example, I would only say:
try
solve
nan
prob
In that way, you would say it much more easily. Once you are
able to catch up with the speaker’s speed, add the minor
sounds. In my example, I would add some more sounds:
trying
solve
nancial problem
After practicing several times, I was able to say the whole
sentence at the native speaker’s speed and with correct stress on
sounds.
I’m trying to solve this financial problem.
99In my experience, this is the most difficult step, but it is
extremely powerful. When choosing your listening material to
practice this technique, you need to make sure to select material
in which the speaker speaks at his or her daily normal speed. Do
not use those speed-reduced listening material as it will make
this technique ineffective. In the beginning, be prepared to
practice up to 50 or 60 times per sentence! Well, good
pronunciation does not come accidentally; it requires serious
effort.
You may be wondering: “Oh no! If I have to repeat 50 – 60
times one sentence, how long will it take to practice thousands
of sentences out there?” Just calm down! If you practice
everyday, it will take you 2 – 3 weeks to get familiar with the
native speaker’s rhythm and speed. You don’t need to practice
all the sentences you learn because there are only a limited
number of types of intonation which tend to repeat over and
over again.
After 2 – 3 weeks of practicing this technique, it will be time for
fluency and pronunciation to come along together. Use your
“native-like” speaking voice to practice Step no. 3 in the 3-step
speaking technique in Chapter 7. Record your speech and see
how it shines!
How to get rid of your local accent
There are two basic causes why language learners unconsciously
stick their local accent to their foreign language speaking voices.
Being aware of them will help you get rid of your local accent
when speaking the new language and make it sound more like a
native speaker.
The first reason why many learners fail to pronounce properly is
that they are fooled by the way a word is written. When we read
a word, we tend to be affected unconsciously by our mother
tongue transcription. Also, most English vowels and
100consonants, such as θ, ð, æ... do not exist in Vietnamese; but it
has vowels and consonants, which are relatively close to these
English sounds. Therefore, when a Vietnamese person reads an
English word, he would unconsciously apply his Vietnamese
vowels and consonants to that word and pronounce it
incorrectly. In my English class, when I asked my students to
pronounce some long words, such as “miscellaneous”,
“extraordinary” or “entrepreneur”, they were less likely to
pronounce properly if they kept looking at the word in their
books. Then when I asked them to stop looking at their books
and focus on listening to the native speaker’s voice, they felt it
much easier to imitate the word. Now, you can understand why
I ask you not to look at the script in all of my listening and
speaking techniques.
Another cause is that learners tend to use their mother tongue
vowels and consonants as the “standard” to adjust and position
their pronunciation. This happens when a learner hears the
sound of a new word, for example, when a Chinese native
speaker learns the word “down”, which is pronounced as [daun].
Since this sound does not exist in his “language map”, he would
“screen” through his “data source” and find a Chinese sound
that is pronounced very closely to the sound of the word he is
learning. The problem here is that the vowel [aun] of the
English word and the Chinese equivalent are not exactly the
same, so when he uses the Chinese vowel as a base to adjust his
pronunciation of the English word, he has unconsciously
developed what we call the local accent in speaking the foreign
language. The sad thing is that many non-native teachers
instruct their students to do so. You may have heard some
teacher say things like: “This word can be pronounced similar
to the word... in our language”. Such a method seems to be the
easiest and quickest way of explaining how a word is
pronounced. However, the drawback is that it will stick the
learners’ local accent to their new language speaking voice. To
solve this problem, you need to have a zero-based thinking.
Every time you learn to pronounce a new word, forget your
mother tongue. Learn it as if you were a baby. Of course, it is
101easier said than done. But if you discipline yourself to do so,
you will be able to take your local accent off your voice and
make it sound like a native speaker’s tongue.
Three steps to polish your pronunciation even
further
By practicing only the sound stressing technique described
above, you will have mastered the most important part of
pronunciation, which will help you to confidently communicate
in your target language. However, if you are seeking to improve
your pronunciation further to make it sound more like a native
voice, here are three steps to polish your pronunciation and
make it shine.
Step 1: Recognize the “core” sound
You cannot imitate the sound of a word correctly if you are not
crystal clear about what you have heard. The first time you hear
a native speaker say some word, you seem not to be able to hear
it “clearly” enough. Any language learner faces this issue. Let
me show you an example to illustrate this point. Let’s assume
that you have not yet learned Chinese characters. Now, let me
show you a handwritten Chinese character below and ask you to
copy it.
102This word in Chinese means “be patient (adj)”. Before you read
any further, grab your pen and try to copy it! If you have
finished copying, what did you realize? You cannot copy it
100% accurately, is that right? Since it is someone’s handwriting,
you simply cannot copy the shape entirely. If a Chinese guy
looked at your work, he would immediately recognize that it
was “drawn” by a person who does not know Chinese. The
reason why you faced obstacles writing that character is because
it included the writer’s personal handwriting style. Therefore,
when looking at the image, you were not able to determine
which strokes were modified by the writer’s handwriting style
and which strokes formed the basic shape of the Chinese word
“be patient”. In other words, you failed to determine the “core
pattern” of that Chinese character. Now, let me show you some
other versions of the same word but written by different
persons.
Okay, if I now tell you to write the word “be patient” in
Chinese, would you feel more confident? Having observed
several different handwritten versions of the word, you are able
to recognize their common pattern. In other words, you could
recognize the basic pattern of the Chinese word “be patient”.
The same thing happens when you first hear a new word. You
would have a similar “unclear” feeling. You seem not to be able
to hear the sound clearly even if the speaker repeats it several
times. It is because the sound created by the speaker has been
mixed with his own personal voice. Each person has his own
specific set of vocal chords. Therefore, different people create
103different mixed sounds when they speak, like the various
handwriting styles illustrated above. That is why it could be hard
for you to recognize the “core pattern” that forms the proper
sound of a new word. Consequently, if you fail to recognize it,
you will likely fail to imitate it.
The solution here is simple—to determine the “core
pattern” of a word, you need to hear it from several
different voices. If you remember my basic philosophy,
which is based on “massive input”, you will see that my
listening technique encourages you to expose yourself to
massive listening material. If you follow my technique, you will
have a chance to hear the most common words and phrases
spoken by various speakers. Doesn’t it already solve the
problem of this step?
Step 2: Imitate the sound you have heard
At this step, you simply imitate the sound of the word you’ve
heard as I have described in the listening technique. Don’t look
at the script; just mimic the sound. As you pronounce the word
out loud, your ears will hear the sound you have just produced
and compare it with the native speaker’s sounds. If you find
that the two sounds (yours and the speaker’s) are too different,
you will want to try it again. However, there will probably be a
problem here you need to be aware of. The sound you hear as
your voice will not be exactly how it actually is. It is because the
sound goes through your skull to your ears, so the skull will
affect the way it sounds to you. This explains why many people
are surprised when they listen to their own voice played by a
recorder. They would say: “Oh! Is that my voice? It sounds
strange?” Due to this problem, we need to have our third step.
Step 3: Record it, hear it and adjust it
In Step 1, you got the “standard” sound to compare your voice
with. In Step 2, you have produced your own sound. In this
step, you will need to record and hear it to see if your
pronunciation is close to the “standard” sound yet. Craig
104Valentine, the 1999 World Speaking Champion, said: “get
recorded, get rewarded”. Only as you record your voice,
would you be able to address your mistakes. Therefore, what
you do in this step is to fine-tune your pronunciation by
recording your speech, listening to the recording and then
correcting your pronunciation until it shines.
Although you will definitely have to spend time on this, there
are only a limited number of different vowels and consonants
for you to practice. So don’t think that you will have to do these
three steps for every single word you learn.
Before closing this chapter, I would like to share with you my
personal experience. Many students have asked me how to
pronounce well. I usually ask them back: “How much time do
you spend each day practicing pronunciation?” Well, as you can
guess, very few people do it seriously on a daily basis. And my
answer to their question is: “practice, practice and practice”;
otherwise, the miracle will never happen.
105CHAPTER NINE
Viewing Grammar
From Another
Aspect
“An essential aspect of creativity is not being afraid to fail.”
- EDWIN LAND
H
ave you ever asked yourself these questions: “Why do
I have to learn grammar? What will happen if I don’t
learn it? Are those linguists making things
complicated? Why can we speak our mother tongue fluently
without learning grammar?” In fact, many people (including
106me) have admitted that they could not distinguish grammar
terms, such as adverbs, adjuncts, attributive adjectives, definite
article, indefinite articles... until they learned them in foreign
language grammar sessions. The question is: can we speak a
new language if we do not learn its grammar?
In this chapter, I am going to show you a more practical view
about grammar. I’ll tell you how to approach it effectively and
how to utilize it as a tool rather than an obstacle in learning a
new language.
Yes, grammar was not meant to bring trouble to you. As
humans around the world developed their languages and made
it a more and more sophisticated communication tool, they
tried to find ways so that people can “speak less but express
more”. We all know that by mutual consent among people
certain combinations of sounds have come to represent certain
meanings. These combinations of sounds are called words and
phrases. As the need for expressing more meanings arises,
people add more words and phrases onto their list. Today, new
words keep emerging to express new concepts, such as “blog”,
“social media”, “cloud computing”... However, to prevent the
dictionary from becoming thicker, people try to find ways to
express more concepts without having to add more words. So,
they use methods, such as changing word forms, switching
word positions (for example, as in English questions), adding
one or two letters at the end of a word (for example, adding
letters “s” or “es” to express plural in English)... These
methods are a part of what we call grammar. As you see,
grammar helps us express more content without having too
many words. When I started viewing grammar more positively,
I found that grammar helps us express our ideas more precisely,
profoundly and sophisticatedly. It can help us describe a
situation or an action more clearly in terms of its time and
space. While grammar helps you express your ideas better as
you speak, it also helps you understand others’ ideas better as
you listen.
107I am not going to teach you grammar here; there are a whole
bunch of grammar books out there, which have beautifully
done this task. I just want to share with you that grammar is a
good friend, not something that always tries to puzzle you.
Is grammar a must if I want to speak a new
language?
There have been many disputes on this issue. Some linguists
state that you can speak without learning grammar just as you
did with your mother tongue. Other linguists argue that in
essence people actually unconsciously acquire grammar when
they learn to speak their first language, although they may not
clearly define grammar terms, such as articles, prepositions, the
perfect tense... Personally, I think they all have their own
reasonable arguments. In my opinion, there are two extreme
positions on this issue. The first is to learn the new language
without learning any grammar rule. In this extreme, learners will
have to memorize many more words, as they don’t have any
rules to follow. For example, let’s say I apply this extreme to
English, and I am learning the verb “do”. I will have to
memorize all its cases, including: I do, we do, you do, he does, she
does, it does, I did, we did, you did, he did, she did, it did...The other
extreme is to learn all the rules as taught in those grammar
textbooks. For the same example, I will have to memorize the
following rules:
108
- I is the 1 st person singular pronoun
- We is the 1 st person plural pronoun
- You is both 2 nd person singular and plural pronoun
- He/she/it are 3 rd person singular pronouns
- They is the 3 rd person plural pronoun
- The verb “do” in the simple present tense has the following
forms:o “Do” if the subject is 1 st or 2 nd person (singular
or plural) or 3 rd person plural
o “Does” if the subject is 3 rd person singular
- The verb “do” in the simple past tense has only one form
for every case: “Did”
- And on and on...
If you follow the first extreme, which is learning without rules,
you will have to memorize a larger amount of information since
you have to remember everything individually. The other
extreme, learning with rules, can help dramatically reduce the
workload. In certain languages, people are even able to squeeze
all grammar rules into just a few pages. This is the undisputable
advantage of learning grammar with rules. However, learning by
rules has its own drawbacks. The first disadvantage is that the
rules may not be easy to memorize. They are just like
mathematical formulae. Some people even have to integrate the
rules into poems to memorize them. I agree that using poems to
remember the rules could be a great solution for your language
grammar exam. But the story is different in real communication.
Have you ever been in situations in which you failed to apply
grammar rules when you were speaking? Does it seem like it is
too hard to integrate those grammar rules into your daily verbal
communication? This is the basic disadvantage of learning
language through rules. Imagine a non-native speaker talking to
his American friend. He wants to ask her if her boyfriend is
going to marry her soon. His brain will have to go through a
complicated process like this:
- To express a question about someone’s plans in the near
future, he should use the structure: to be + subject + going
to + verb infinitive + object
- “He” is 3 rd person singular pronoun
- The form of the verb “to be” in 3 rd person singular should
be “is”
109-
With the above rules, the guy should ask: “is + he + going
to + marry + you?”
This is too much data for his brain to process while he is
speaking. As you can guess, he would likely be awkward and
fumbling with his words. And his friend may not be patient
enough to continue talking to him. Does it happen to you? This
problem may happen not only as you are speaking but also as
you are listening. If it takes you too much time to process the
meaning of the grammar structure that the speaker is using, you
might not have enough time to catch the next sentence.
So, what should we do to cope with this problem? Do you
remember the concepts of “recognizing words” and “using
words” that we mentioned in Chapter 7? The philosophy here is
quite similar. You can use one way or another to learn a
language—with grammar rules or without them. But knowing
and remembering grammar rules does not mean you can use
them fluently. The first extreme, learning grammar case by case
without rules, therefore, has the advantage that you won’t have
to think much when you speak. You would simply pick up
grammar just as you pick up words. The problem here is how to
reduce the workload if you have to remember case by case? Or
how to simplify the complicated process if you remember and
use rules? That is not an easy question. In the following pages, I
am going to share with you my experience in this issue.
Although it may not yet be a perfect solution, it would help you
utilize the advantages of both approaches.
Learn grammar in a simpler way
Do not memorize the grammar formula; memorize the
simplified samples.
Let me use an example from my studying English. One of the
most confusing grammar rules that I (and other English
learners, too) have ever learned is the three types of conditional
sentences. The if clause and the main clause use different tenses
110and they vary across types 1, 2 and 3. Each of them has a
different meaning. I not only have to memorize how to use the
correct verb form in the if clause and the main clause, but also
have to remember which type of conditional sentence to use in
practical situations. It was really hard! However, things have
been much easier since I started using simplified samples rather
than the dry and confusing rules. What do I mean by
“simplified samples”? Let’s use a conditional sentence as an
example. One of the three types has the following rule:
(if clause) If + subject + had + verb in present perfect tense + object,
(main clause) subject + would have + verb in present perfect tense + object
Honestly, it would take me a whole minute to use this structure
in conversation. Now, if I use a simplified sample, it will look
like the one below:
If you had done this, you would have done that
Firstly, this sample is much easier to memorize than the long
rule above. It is shorter and less dry. When I want to apply this
sample in practice, it is easier for me to do because I have fewer
spots to be replaced. I can simply replace “done” with the verb
I need. And because “done” is in the present perfect tense, it
reminds me to use the verb in the same form. Then, I replace
you and this/that with the subjects and the objects that I need. In
this way, my brain will have to process less workload when I
apply the sample in real speaking. Further, samples are still
representatives, so they help reduce the amount of information
to be memorized compared with learning and memorizing
everything case by case. You will still need to practice seriously
in order to use and apply these simplified samples.
Don’t care about the names of grammar rules
When linguists compose grammar textbooks, they name the
rules so that learners can distinguish them. However, these
names are scientific and, therefore, difficult to remember. For
example, in English, there are three types of conditional
111sentences—type 1, type 2 and type 3. However, even when I
can speak English fluently and use conditional sentences
comfortably, I cannot remember exactly which type I am using.
When you speak, I am sure you don’t want to waste time
recalling which number you should use in a certain situation.
My suggestion here is you should relate the simplified sample to
another parallel sample in your mother tongue. In other words,
ask yourself: how would I express a simplified sample in my
mother tongue? And to make a deeper sense of grammar, you
can attach it with a specific example. For instance: “If you had
stayed at home, you would have met her”.
Do not translate the grammar
In a grammar textbook, the author is responsible for describing
the grammar structures in a scientific and logical way. It is just
like people drafting a contract. Sometimes, when learners apply
the explanation in a grammar book, they try to “translate” the
grammar structure. For example, if an English learner reads or
hears the sentence: “If I had stayed at home, I would have met her”, he
would try to translate the grammar like this:
- This sentence has the form of a conditional sentence
type 3
- That means both the “if clause” and the “main clause”
are unreal and the context happened in the past.
- Therefore, the speaker was actually not at home and he
did not meet her.
This explanation is correct, but it is quite stiff and complicated.
It may make the original sentence obscure and may confuse the
learner. In the above example, the speaker could have expressed
a sense of regret. In other words, maybe, he wished he were at
home. But the learner may miss this sense if he applies the
grammar explanation stiffly. To avoid this mistake, when you
are exposed to a grammar structure, ask yourself: “What does
the speaker really mean? What sense does the speaker want to
deliver?” By asking these questions, you will get to the speaker’s
112real message. As you get familiar with samples, you will no
longer have to check your grammar book every time you see a
difficult structure.
At the end of the day, grammar is a set of different ways of
arranging and coordinating words so that they can express
different meanings, context and senses. By getting massive
input through reading and listening, you will get exposed to
repeated grammar structures in various contexts. In such a way,
it will be easier for you to acquire grammar structures and
understand their meanings than by merely memorizing the
grammar formulas in textbooks. And finally, knowing the
grammar structures is one thing; using them appropriately is a
different story. You will need to practice, practice and practice.
113CHAPTER TEN
Other Techniques
for You to
Accelerate
“Action is the foundational key to all success.”
- PABLO PICASSO
114The power of a single united force
Sun Tzu is the best known strategist in the history of China.
One of his famous strategies is to form a single united body to
be a whole to penetrate the enemy’s weakest part. This strategy
can help an army’s few to defeat its enemy’s many. You can
apply a similar philosophy to learning a new language. By using
your various tools and methods, such as reading, writing,
speaking, listening, watching (TV)..., as a single united force to
penetrate into a specific topic, you would be able to quickly
conquer all the common words and phrases related to it. As you
are able to read, listen, write and speak confidently about a
certain topic, you will gain huge energy and momentum to
move forward.
I have a student who works as a real estate broker. He applied
this method quite successfully in learning English. Every
morning, he would spend half an hour reading the book “How
to make money in real estate”. Sometimes, he was so attracted
by the content that he would forget to go to his office on time.
At noon, after a quick lunch, he would relax playing the game
“Simcity”, an interesting computer game in which the player
plays the role of a mayor building a new city. Although this
game has a Vietnamese version, he used the English version
instead. To play the game effectively, he would read and listen
to the instructions in it so that he could arrange all the virtual
buildings, cafes, libraries, schools... in a profitable manner.
Leaving his office in the afternoon, he would spend another 30
minutes watching the real estate news on CNBC or on the
website www.rentv.com (a site providing commercial real estate
news). He would absorb the information from this news pretty
well because most of the words and phrases it uses have already
appeared in the book and in the game “Simcity”. Every evening,
he would visit the site www.realestateforum.com to read or
write a post, share his comments with other brokers all over the
world. The knowledge he got from the book, the game and the
forum was very beneficial to his job. He even became an expert
in his field. Several times every week, he would videotape
115himself updating real estate news in his city and sharing his
ideas about investment strategy. Many of his customers liked his
videos and followed him on Youtube and Facebook. He was
not merely learning English; he was using the language in his
field.
You can do the same with your area of expertise. Whatever it is,
find a book, a computer game, a TV channel, a forum... and
give this tactic a try. Do not learn your target language in a
painful way; try to exploit its benefits. Keep in mind that
motivation and excitement is the key.
Learn continuously and intensively
Learning a new language is like riding a bicycle up a slope.
Guess what will happen if you climb up to the middle of the
slope and then... pause? You will slip down, right? Then, if you
start to climb again and pause somewhere in the middle, you
will slip again. In fact, many people are wasting time doing it
that way. When it comes to learning a new language,
intensiveness is a very important factor that determines your
efficiency. If you lose your focus, you will not be able to retain
the words and phrases you have learned. To avoid this, you
should have a goal, make a plan and discipline yourself to work
on the plan on a daily basis.
Smile before every learning session
David Brooks, the 1990 world champion of public speaking,
said: “When you smile, you relax – When you relax, you learn”.
Have you ever asked yourself why you seem to be more
intelligent while playing a computer game than writing an exam.
Also, when you are frightened of something, your brain freezes
and you may not think of any solution.
116Scientists have proved that our brain can learn new information
or knowledge most efficiently when we are relaxed and/or
excited. Many parents, for example, are not aware of this fact
and make the mistake of being impatient with their kids as they
try to help them to learn. The more impatient they are, the less
information the kids can absorb. In order to learn efficiently,
you need to prepare a positive state of mind. A positive state of
mind has characteristics, such as: relaxation, joyfulness,
inspiration, confidence... The good news is you can use some
physical and psychological tactics to have a positive state of
mind. Below are a number of tactics that I frequently use:
- Listen to baroque music and relax yourself before a
learning session. Baroque music has a very positive
impact on your mind. It can help you relax and
concentrate more. Except for a language listening
session, you can turn on the baroque music throughout
your learning session. Many writers also listen to
baroque music while they are writing their works.
- Think of your goal and your reason why you want to
learn the language before a learning session. As I
mentioned in Chapter 1, your brain needs a big enough
reason to do a difficult task for you. If something visible
can represent your reason, place it on your desk so that
it will motivate you more.
- Talk to yourself positively. Tell yourself: “I am very
smart!” or “I am a great Chinese speaker! (Of course,
only if you are learning Chinese!)” This is a very
common tactic that is used by athletes prior to a game,
by politicians prior to a speech, sales persons prior to a
sales meeting... Psychologists call it “positive self talk”.
Do you recall how good you’ve felt every time you
received a compliment? Even if sometimes you know
that the compliment is not honest, you still feel
happiness deep inside your heart. Why is that? It is
because even though your conscious mind is able to
recognize a dishonest compliment, your subconscious
117mind is not. Therefore, when you tell yourself: “I am
smart”, your subconscious mind will accept this
message, and it will boost your brain to work more
effectively. Try it out several times, and you will see its
effect.
Learn while you are sleeping
When we sleep, our sleep goes through 5 stages. The fifth stage
is called the REM sleep (Rapid Eye Moving sleep). Every night,
we go through this 5-stage cycle several times: 1, 2, 3, 4, REM,
1, 2, 3, 4, REM, 1, 2, 3, 4, REM... Each cycle takes from 60 to
100 minutes varying among people. Scientists have done many
studies on the human 5-stage sleep. They believe that during the
REM stage, our brain reinforces and sorts out the information
we have absorbed during the day. In other words, the REM
sleep is when we are digesting the knowledge and information
we’ve gathered. This explains why infants in their first few
months spend most of their time sleeping, and 50% of their
sleep is REM sleep. In fact, my title is not precisely stated. We
actually do not learn more information when we sleep, but we
digest and reinforce the information. However, taking
advantage of the REM sleep will help boost your learning
speed. Here are the steps to utilizing your REM sleep:
- Learn using various senses (reading, listening, watching,
speaking) in the day
- Have a review session right before going to bed
- Have another review session right after waking up.
Since the REM sleep is the last stage of the cycle, it happens
several times at night and prior to your waking up. Scientists
believe that most of your dreams occur during the REM stage.
That is why we usually dream right before we wake up. This is
also true of me, and I found an interesting thing about it. It
happened when I was studying hard to prepare for my TOEFL
(Test Of English as a Foreign Language). One late evening
118when I was practicing my listening session, I fell asleep while
the tape was still running. In my dream, I saw myself talking to
a foreigner and I understood everything he said. Waking up, I
found that the conversation that I heard in my dream was
actually from the tape, which kept running all night (as I had set
it on the auto-rewind mode). I have tried this tactic many more
times and found that it is very effective for developing my
listening skills. If you want to try this technique, you can do the
following:
- Use a tape/CD/mp3 player that has a timing function
so that it can play at a specific time according to your
setting. Of course, instead of setting it to ring, you need
to set it so it will play the listening session you want.
- Set the timer one hour before your waking up time. For
example, if you normally wake up at 7 a.m., set the timer
at 6 a.m. Set the volume low enough so that it will not
wake you up fully.
Please note that you should not use this tactic with totally new
listening material, which is too hard for you decipher. You
should use material, which you have listened to before. Try it
out! It will be interesting.
Immerse yourself in an environment full of the
new language
You can create such an environment right in your home
country. Below are ways that I used to create an English-filled
environment when I was learning it in Vietnam.
1. Set listening material as your alarm tone
The very first minutes after you wake up every morning have a
big impact on your mood, emotion and momentum. If you
want to have a sad day, listen to sad music as you wake up. If
you want to have a day of anxiety and worry, read those rubbish
119news about robbing and killing. If you wish to develop your
new language, start your day accordingly.
2. Read an article written in your target language
when you get up
If you are like me who has the habit of grabbing the favorite
newspaper before going to work, try to replace it by another
one written in the new language. When I was learning English, I
disciplined myself to read CNN.com instead of my favorite
Vietnamnews.com.
3. Use your computer in your target language
Most of us today spend a huge amount of time on our
computers. If you are using Windows or Macintosh in your
mother tongue version, switch to a version in your target
language. Every time you have a problem with your computer,
try reading the instructions in the “Help” section. That is a very
simple yet effective way to create the new language
environment factor.
4. Watch TV channels in the new language
It is not too hard today to enjoy TV channels from almost any
country in the world. You have plenty of choices—cable TV,
digital TV, satellite TV... Remove every channel that speaks
your mother tongue. Only sign up for channels in your target
language. By doing so you will force yourself to get more
exposure to the language you want to learn. Even when there is
a hot movie, refrain yourself from watching it in your mother
tongue. Please note that you also should not look at the subtitle
if you want to develop your listening skills because your ears
will be much less active when your eyes have already caught the
meaning. So you need to cover the subtitle with a tape or
something.
5. Proactively join online forums in the target
language
120When you do so, please note that you need to select those
forums whose members are native speakers. Secondly, join the
ones that interest you or relate to your area of expertise;
otherwise, you will quickly get bored of it.
6. If you play a computer game, use the version in
your target language
This is a very powerful tool for you to develop your new
language. When you play, you have a chance to get involved in
the new language context. Most games include sounds,
conversations and text, which can help you practice your
reading and listening skills. The interactive environment is an
important factor that makes computer games an outstanding
tool for learning a new language.
7. Make friends with native speakers in your home
town
If you are learning one of the more common languages, such as
French, Chinese, Spanish..., chances are that there might be
native speakers living in your home town. If that is the case,
don’t miss the chance to make friends with them. The good
news is most of them will be willing to be your friend. Why?
Imagine if you go to another country to live there for a while,
would you want to make friends with the native people there?
You would, wouldn’t you? Because making friends with them
will help you a lot. You will know more about the culture, the
cuisine, the language... The same thing happens when
foreigners come to your town. They would be more than happy
to hang out with you. Therefore, don’t hesitate! Below are the
two common sources to find them:
-
Ask a tour guide in your town. Foreigners coming to
your town will likely concentrate in some specific area
where they can share and meet their common needs. A
tour guide will know exactly which bars or clubs they
normally go to. You can go there, buy a drink and tell
them that you want to learn their language. Most people
will be happy to hear someone from another country
121saying that he wants to learn their language. Ask them if
you can help in some way. You can offer to be their
tour guide for free, in exchange for a chance to practice
your new language with a native speaker. If one person
does not agree to your request for some reason, it is
fine; just look for another one.
-
You can also find online forums where expatriates and
tourists in your home town communicate. Instead of
going to a bar, you can post your offer on such a forum.
When I was learning English, I visited sites, such as:
www.livinginvietnam.com,
www.alloexpat.com/vietnam_expat_forum/
www.expat-blog.com/.../vietnam/...
There should be similar sites that suit your needs.
Members on these sites normally share their experiences
and knowledge on topics, such as: cuisine, recruitment,
jobs, tourism... Take your time to go over it; then, you
can show your goodwill by posting some valuable
answers to their questions. Since you are a local person,
you should know a lot of things that they would not.
After doing so, there should be many foreigners willing
to make friends with you.
I think that is quite enough for you to create an environment
that favors learning your target language. The bottom line here
is that if you want it badly enough, you can make it happen.
122FINAL THOUGHTS
And so, we have reached the end of “Five steps to speak a
new language”. I have handed you a whole bunch of
techniques and tools that will help you expedite the learning
process and shorten your learning curve. However, in my
opinion, although my techniques can boost your learning
engine, it is not the most important factor for your success,
because no matter what kind of weapon a soldier is
given, victory will not come until he goes off to the
front line.
123124