CHAPTER FOUR
1 st Input
The Free Reading
Technique
“Some people know how to teach, and some know how to do.”
- LINDA PIERCE
I
f you have selected your topic as instructed in the previous
chapter, it is time to start right now. In the next pages, I will
instruct you how to get the 1 st input by using a technique
that I call the Free Reading technique.
35Free Reading Vs. Comprehension Reading
As its name suggests, this technique is different from the
Comprehension Reading section that you usually find in a
textbook. A typical Comprehension Reading section is a half-
page paragraph, sometimes longer or shorter depending on the
intention of the composer. When reading it, you are required to
underline new words. In many books, the author might already
do this job for you. You would usually check the meaning of
these words, try to memorize them. There could be several
questions underneath the paragraph for you to answer. You
would probably translate this paragraph into you mother tongue
and on... and on... Basically, this method is more a learning
approach.
To give you a closer look at the Comprehension Reading
technique, it is best to use an example for illustration. Please
note that all of my illustrations are in English, as English is my
second language. If you are an English native speaker looking to
learn any other language in the world, this technique (and the
other techniques, as well) will still be valid. Now let’s consider
the following example:
***
She's not normally camera-shy but a tired-looking Sarah Ferguson avoided
reporters on her arrival at Los Angeles airport. And again later when she was
due to be the star of a Hollywood red-carpet event, honoured by a
childrens' charity for her humanitarian work. But her efforts to help
others have been overshadowed by her attempts to help herself and
Ms Ferguson sneaked in to collect her award.
She has said she's sorry after a newspaper secretly filmed her offering access to
Prince Andrew for half a million pounds. There's no suggestion he knew of her
plan.
In the past Sarah Ferguson has been an author, TV presenter and film producer.
But her media company recently collapsed with large debts. She
admitted money problems but said they were no excuse for a
36serious lapse in judgement. This attempted deal, though not illegal,
may have gone too far.
Rajesh Mirchandani, BBC News, Los Angeles
Vocabulary:
camera-shy
red-carpet event
humanitarian work
overshadowed by
to help herself
sneaked in
collapsed with large debts
admitted money problems
a serious lapse in judgement
have gone too far
***
This is a language learning section I borrowed from the site
Learning English published by BBC Vietnamese. This website is
dedicated to helping Vietnamese people to learn English.
Overall, this is a useful website. I am not doing a critique here.
My intention is to show you the difference between the two
reading techniques that we have been talking about so far. As
you can see in the example above, the words that are considered
“important” are underlined or in bold, then followed by notes
explaining the meaning of each word. If I were to study this
reading section in my English class, the teacher would write
these words onto the board, explain their meaning, instruct how
to pronounce them etc. This method is very common from the
beginner to advanced levels. When using this approach, the
teacher assumes that you already know all other words. The
underlined words or those in bold are focused upon because
they are supposed to be more complicated and more difficult
for the learners.
Okay, now let me ask you a question: are you sure that all
those difficult and “important” words listed in the
example are worth your time and effort? Recall what
37we talked about the Pareto principle (80/20 rule) and core
vocabulary in Chapter 2: our strategy is to focus on the core
vocabulary which constitutes just 5% of the whole vocabulary
but brings in 95% results. If so, you want to make sure that the
words you spend time on should be the most common words,
not the most uncommon ones. Coming back to the example,
you could now see that the Comprehension reading method
tends to drive you to focus on the most difficult words. My
next question is: are the difficult words the most common ones?
Unfortunately, the answer is no! Most times, the shorter and
simpler words are more common than the long and
complicated ones. To double check this judgment, please visit
the website http://wordcount.org/main.php. This website
provides rankings based on how common a certain word is.
Although I cannot vouch for its reliability, at least it can give us
a rough idea.
In the “Find Word” box of the website, enter the word you
want to check. If you try some word like “humanitarian” (from
the list in the example above), you will see it’s ranked 11507.
This rank tells you that the word is far less common than those
of the core vocabulary (which are the 3000 most common
words).
38If you want to explore word frequencies more, you can visit
http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Wiktionary:Frequency_lists.
However, this site does not contain a search box for you to type
in the word you want to look up, so you must find it manually.
But if I were you, I would not waste time on this issue any
more. I would care more about how to get my core vocabulary
and how to master it.
Let’s come back to the example and see how we can approach it
in a more efficient way. We are going to remove all bolds and
underlining from the words in the passage.
***
She's not normally camera-shy but a tired-looking Sarah Ferguson avoided
reporters on her arrival at Los Angeles airport. And again later when she was
due to be the star of a Hollywood red-carpet event, honoured by a childrens' charity
for her humanitarian work. But her efforts to help others have been overshadowed
by her attempts to help herself and Ms Ferguson sneaked in to collect her award.
She has said she's sorry after a newspaper secretly filmed her offering access to
Prince Andrew for half a million pounds. There's no suggestion he knew of her
plan.
In the past Sarah Ferguson has been an author, TV presenter and film producer.
But her media company recently collapsed with large debts. She admitted money
problems but said they were no excuse for a serious lapse in judgement. This
attempted deal, though not illegal, may have gone too far.
***
Since this paragraph is quite short, I am going to search for
another article about the same topic to make my point clearer.
Thanks to Google, I have found the one below:
39***
Sarah Ferguson was caught on tape accepting cash from an undercover journalist
in exchange for access to her ex husband, Prince Andrew, Britain's special
representative for international trade and investment.
"Five hundred thousand pounds [approx $750,000] when you can, to me... [to]
open doors," Ferguson, 50, says on videotape during a meeting at a swanky
London apartment, according to the British tabloid News of the World, which
also printed a transcript of the conversation.
"Then you open up all the channels, whatever you need, whatever you want... We
can do so much," she went on. "If you want to meet him in your business, look
after me and he'll look after you."
Ferguson, a former Weight Watchers spokeswoman, appears to ask the reporter,
who is posing as an international tycoon, for $40,000 in cash, and $720,000 by
wire transfer "if you want a deal with Andrew... and then you meet Andrew."
After a pile of money is show on a coffee tape, the duchess puts her head in her
hands (it's unclear if she's smiling or crying), and then moments later, hauls away
a black computer bag stuffed with the cash, which is described as a fee for "doing
the big deal with Andrew."
Ferguson says that Andrew was aware of the deal, but the newspaper says he was
not.
"I will listen to the friendship talk between you two. And then I do it... You two
talk. I listen. Then I activate," she said. "He meets the most amazing people.
And he just throws them my way."
Ferguson wed the Duke of York, who is fourth in line to the throne, in 1986, but
they split 10 years later. They are parents to two daughters, Beatrice, 21, and
Eugenie, 20.
"He's so amazing," Ferguson says on the videotape. "We're the happiest divorced
couple in the world."
The royal family was unavailable to comment. Fergie said in a statement that she
had money problems but "that is no excuse for a serious lapse in judgment, and I
am very sorry that this has happened. I very deeply regret the situation and the
embarrassment caused."
40Fergie has lost millions in business ventures (including the closing of her
promotional firm, Hartmoor, last year, which she poured $2 million into), but still
preferred to travel first class and in a chauffeur-driven Bentley.
Her $3 million contract with Weight Watchers expired in 2007, and according to
the Times of London, she had to scale back her lavish 50th birthday party to a
family meal because she couldn't afford it.
***
Now, if you screen these two articles manually, you will find
some words that appear 2, 3 or even 4 times. They are reporter,
attempt, newspaper, film, access, deal, family... The phrase say on the
videotape shows up twice. So that you can find them quickly, let
me underline them in the articles as below:
***
She's not normally camera-shy but a tired-looking Sarah Ferguson avoided
reporters on her arrival at Los Angeles airport. And again later when she
was due to be the star of a Hollywood red-carpet event, honoured by a childrens'
charity for her humanitarian work. But her efforts to help others have been
overshadowed by her attempts to help herself and Ms Ferguson sneaked in to
collect her award.
She has said she's sorry after a newspaper secretly filmed her offering
access to Prince Andrew for half a million pounds. There's no suggestion he
knew of her plan.
In the past Sarah Ferguson has been an author, TV presenter and film
producer. But her media company recently collapsed with large debts. She admitted
money problems but said they were no excuse for a serious lapse in judgement. This
attempted deal, though not illegal, may have gone too far.
***
Sarah Ferguson was caught on tape accepting cash from an undercover
journalist in exchange for access to her ex husband, Prince Andrew, Britain's
special representative for international trade and investment.
41"Five hundred thousand pounds [approx $750,000] when you can, to me... [to]
open doors," Ferguson, 50, says on videotape during a meeting at a
swanky London apartment, according to the British tabloid News of the World,
which also printed a transcript of the conversation.
"Then you open up all the channels, whatever you need, whatever you want... We
can do so much," she went on. "If you want to meet him in your business, look
after me and he'll look after you."
Ferguson, a former Weight Watchers spokeswoman, appears to ask the
reporter, who is posing as an international tycoon, for $40,000 in
cash, and $720,000 by wire transfer "if you want a deal with Andrew... and
then you meet Andrew."
After a pile of money is show on a coffee tape, the duchess puts her head in her
hands (it's unclear if she's smiling or crying), and then moments later, hauls away
a black computer bag stuffed with the cash, which is described as a fee for
"doing the big deal with Andrew."
Ferguson says that Andrew was aware of the deal, but the newspaper says
he was not.
"I will listen to the friendship talk between you two. And then I do it... You two
talk. I listen. Then I activate," she said. "He meets the most amazing people.
And he just throws them my way."
Ferguson wed the Duke of York, who is fourth in line to the throne, in 1986, but
they split 10 years later. They are parents to two daughters, Beatrice, 21, and
Eugenie, 20.
"He's so amazing," Ferguson says on the videotape. "We're the
happiest divorced couple in the world."
The royal family was unavailable to comment. Fergie said in a statement that
she had money problems but "that is no excuse for a serious lapse in judgment,
and I am very sorry that this has happened. I very deeply regret the situation and
the embarrassment caused."
Fergie has lost millions in business ventures (including the closing of her
promotional firm, Hartmoor, last year, which she poured $2 million into), but still
preferred to travel first class and in a chauffeur-driven Bentley.
42Her $3 million contract with Weight Watchers expired in 2007, and according to
the Times of London, she had to scale back her lavish 50th birthday party to a
family meal because she couldn't afford it.
Again, if you want to double check whether these words are
really
common,
check
it
out
on
http://wordcount.org/main.php. Here, if you type the word
“attempt” in the search box, you will get the frequency ranking
of 882.
This result shows that “attempt” does belong to the group of
the 3000 most common words. Logically, the words that appear
more frequently in a group of articles should be the more
common words. On the contrary, the words that are in bold or
underlined in the Comprehension Reading section of a text
book, such as camera-shy, red-carpet event, humanitarian work are
difficult but not common words. With my experience, I am
quite sure that you would rarely use them in many
conversations.
Now that you have got a rough idea about the approach I am
going to share with you, you might be wondering how to really
catch those common words. Screening reading material to find
43the repeated words as I did in the example above is doing it the
hard way. We are going to use a much better method that I call
the Free Reading technique. In this technique, there will be no
questions underneath a paragraph, no translation into your
mother tongue, no underlining... Yet, it is designed to bring
to you the most common words. If you follow this technique,
you must be prepared to read a lot. While reading, you might
not understand 100% of the content. You might feel a little bit
uncomfortable as you will be tempted to understand the whole
content. However, you will shortly adapt to this new method
and then start to acquire a huge amount of core vocabulary
brought in by this technique.
The Free Reading Technique
Now, to practice the Free Reading technique, please go through
the following steps:
Step 1: Select appropriate materials for you to read.
There are many sources of language learning materials available
out there on the Internet and in bookstores. We are not going
to use any of them. We will be using materials that are used by
native speakers in their daily lives and not those specifically
designed for learning purposes. These materials include:
1. Academic (or non-fiction) books: Just look for
books that belong to your area of expertise or interest
written in your target language. For example, my area of
expertise is business administration, so I looked for
books on marketing, selling, management and so on
written in English, my target language. If you cannot
find one at the local book stores, please do a search on
the Internet. Since my target language was English, I
could easily find many options on online bookstores,
such as Amazon or Barns & Noble. However, if your
target language is some thing like Chinese or Korean,
44you may need to look for an online bookstore in that
language. For example, simply run a search for: “online
book store in Chinese”, and you would easily find a
useful
website,
such
as
http://www.hanban.ca/bookstore
2. Fiction books: If you are a fan of stories, this will be
a great source for you. The biggest advantage of stories
is the compelling content of the book itself. As I’ve
mentioned earlier, motivation is the key to learning a
new language. Reading compelling stories would excite
you much more than reading boring paragraphs in
language textbooks.
3. News: This is also a great source as it has updated and
useful information. It helps you relate to your daily life
and get the sense of the content. In addition, hot news
normally comes along with comments and replies that
you can utilize to really get involved in the topic and
practice your output (writing and speaking).
4. Online forums: You can opt to be a member (for
free) of an online forum discussing your favorite topics.
You just need to know the name of the topic written in
your target language; then, do a search on Google.
There should be plenty of options for you. When I was
studying English, because I loved photography, I went
to sites like:
www.thephotoforum.com/forum.
www.photoforum.com
www.photozo.com/forum
...
Because I was going to open my own business, I also
went to forums like:
www.youngentrepreneur.com/forum/index.php
45www.entrepreneursforum.net
...
You can do the same in your target language.
5. Other sources: You can look for types of sources
other than the ones already mentioned. However, to be
a good source, it should satisfy the following criteria:
- It should be written by native speakers.
- It should have one or more of the attributes of good
input mentioned in Chapter 3.
- Its content should be large enough, at least, 3 – 4
pages on one topic. As you can see, the sources
mentioned above are all materials with massive
content, such as books and stories. News can also
be considered massive material, as you can bundle
related news into a group so that it becomes
massive. Similarly, articles or posts on forums are
normally updated and commented upon by forum
members. Since the strategy we use is based on
massive input, I don’t prefer reading materials in
language textbooks because they are usually quite
short and belong to unrelated topics. This does not
support the massive input concept. In addition,
reading materials in textbooks may not match your
area of interest. It probably makes you feel bored.
Step 2: Relax and just... read.
Okay, let’s say I am going to read news, and I am interested in
doing business. Since my target language is English, I will run a
search on Google for business news. Well, I find the “Business
Week”.
46Business Week is a renowned source; it must contain interesting
information on business. Why don’t I just give it a try?
47Information on this website is categorized under various sub-
topics, such as Finance, Technology, Innovation, Management,
Small Business and Global. Since I am an entrepreneur, I will
take a look at the “Small Business” section. In this section, I
pick up an article named “Use storytelling to maintain customer
interest”, hoping it could give me some tactic to sell more of my
products and make more money. Remember to put your area of
interest at top priority; you want to read something that is
useful and compelling to you.
Before reading, please have your dictionary software ready to
use. Here, I am suggesting you use a CD or online version of a
dictionary for checking word meaning, as you want to do it as
quickly as possible. Please do not use the regular book version
of a dictionary, as it will slow down your reading speed.
Another favorite tool of mine is a software piece called “Click
& See”, which I use to see the meaning of a word in my mother
tongue in just one click. If you can get a similar one, utilize it.
48Now that you are ready, let’s start to read from the beginning.
Every time you face a new word (or a word whose meaning you
do not remember), use your dictionary software to check its
meaning quickly and then continue to read. Here are the big
DON’Ts when you are reading:
- DON’T take note of any word (including new words,
difficult words, long words...). Just don’t take any note.
- DON’T force yourself to remember any word.
- DON’T underline or bold any word.
Again, do not take any note! Just read, check the meaning of
any word you want to and do nothing else! Then, you want to
read as fast as possible. While you are reading, sometimes you
do not understand some word even after checking its meaning.
It is fine; a dictionary cannot help you understand everything. In
that case, you just go ahead and ignore that sentence. After
reading a few sentences (maybe, just 1 or 2 sentences), you
might see a certain word that you have just checked the
meaning of a minute before. However, you might not
remember its meaning (because you didn’t take note). Well, no
problem! Just relax; go ahead and check its meaning again using
your software. Then, continue to read. You will likely see that
word again, and you may still not remember its meaning. Just
use your dictionary software again and... continue to read.
Well, after seeing a certain word 3 – 4 times and checking its
meaning over and over again, I am sure you will remember it
the next time you see it. And then... guess what happens? You
would have learned a word from the core vocabulary. Here is
the key: those words that you have seen over and over again
are the most common words. The methodology here is very
simple; the most common words must show up repeatedly.
After reading a long piece, you will forget many words and
retain some words. Those that you forget are uncommon
words, while those that you retain are more common.
49Why could you get so much from the two
simple steps of the Free Reading technique?
I call it the art of simplicity. It is so simple that some of my
students even doubt its effectiveness. However, one does not
need to be very smart to see the benefits that this technique can
bring to learners.
Firstly, the Free Reading technique naturally drives your focus
to the most common words and phrases, and at the same time,
helps you save time by not making you struggle with the
uncommon ones.
Secondly, following this technique, you don’t need to force
yourself to memorize vocabulary. You would naturally retain
vocabulary when:
- you see a certain word over and over again
- you meet a certain word in various contexts and in
different sentence structures. This helps you understand
the real meaning of that word and gives you a sense of it
- sometimes, you find that a certain word usually occurs
prior to or after another word. This helps you
remember how to use it in combination with another
word.
We have already mentioned the factors that you need in order
to really possess and master your vocabulary. To repeat them
here, you need:
- Context
- Content and Topic
- Common structure
After practicing the Free Reading technique, you will realize that
it brings to you all three factors listed above.
Thirdly, this technique allows you to freely choose any content
you want to use as your reading material. Whether you are
50interested in science or art, entrepreneurship or stock exchange,
you will find tons of reading material on the Internet, and many
of them are free. This will keep you excited every time you sit
down to study. You would no longer feel tired and bored. Every
time you find a phrase or structure repeated over and over
again, you achieve something and this motivates you to learn
more. You don’t have to force yourself to think or memorize;
you just learn in a painless way. Most of my students tell me
they could learn for hours using my technique without getting
tired. To me, this is the most important thing needed for you to
learn a new language quickly.
FAQ about practicing the Free Reading
technique
1. Why did I feel like starting from the scratch
again when switching from reading my
books to reading news?
Different types of materials, such as academic books, stories,
news articles, do not have the same tone of writing. For
instance, the way a reporter writes in an article is different from
the way an author writes in his book. The common words in
different types of material could, therefore, be slightly different.
However, they still share a common core vocabulary
intersection. This can be illustrated in the figure below:
51News
Academic
Books
Stories
When switching from one type of material to another, you will
probably have to spend sometime getting familiar with the
different tones. However, it will not take much time.
2. There are sentences I do not understand,
even though I have checked all the words
using my dictionary. What should I do then?
This happens all the time due to the following reasons:
-
52
You could have come up against a grammar problem.
Let’s use an example to illustrate this idea. In the
sentence: “I have just come back”, the two words “have
just” form a grammar structure that indicates that an
action happened right before speaking and not long ago.
However, if I check the words “have” and “just”
separately in my dictionary, I will not have the correct
answer. So, I will not be able to understand this
sentence. Fortunately, this case is quite easy to recognize
because each language uses a set of typical words to
make up grammar. For example, in English, this set of
words include have, would, could, should, must, be...
put together in certain ways. So, every time I meet a
word like this, I would stop to check in my grammar
book to see if there is a grammar case here.-
You could have met a phrase or an idiom. It is a group
of words that have a meaning different from the
meaning of all the individual words put together. Each
word has a different meaning when going separately;
together, they usually have an unrelated meaning.
In both cases, try exploring more in your dictionary. When you
check a certain word, a comprehensive dictionary should
contain the common idioms, phrases and grammar structures
that are related to that word. Therefore, you could probably
find the answer in your dictionary if the one you are using is
comprehensive enough. However, it is very important to keep
your reading speed at a high level because our concept here is
Massive Input. Therefore, if you cannot find the answer, just
ignore it. If you do not see that phrase or idiom again, it is
worth forgetting. If you see it again, then you can be sure that it
is worth your effort to explore more about it. In my experience,
the Internet community is a great way to find your answer.
When I was studying English, I would usually search for the
answer using Google; it brought me to sites or forums, such as:
http://forum.wordreference.com/forumdisplay.php?f=6
http://www.englishclub.com/ref/index.htm
The logic here is that you are not the first person who wants to
learn the language, so, there should be someone out there who
has had the same question and someone else must have already
posted an answer for it.
3 steps to read a book written in your target
language
In the last section of this chapter, I would like to share with you
an experience of mine in reading books written in my target
language English. It’s a great experience when you manage to
read an entire book in a new language. After accomplishing
such a task, your vocabulary would be amazingly significant.
53However, as many of my students face obstacles practicing my
Free Reading technique, I have developed three steps to help
them overcome it and read a book entirely. The steps are as
follows:
- Step 1: Read the first half of the first page. Take a break.
- Step 2: Read the second half of the first page and the
entire second page. Take a break.
- Step 3: Read the entire book
Okay, I know you are questioning why I created these three
steps. It looks ridiculous. Why didn’t I just group these three
steps into one? Let me explain.
As you start reading the first page, your reading speed will be
very slow. It might take you hours to read and understand the
very first lines. In my experience, it took me an hour to read
half of the first page. You would then feel tired and frustrated.
It is OKAY! What you should do then is to take a break and
relax. After your energy comes back, try to finish the first page.
If your vocabulary is few, it might take two or even three hours
to finish just the first page. As a result, you might think: “Oh
no! This book contains more than a 100 pages; how long would
it take to finish them all?” Just calm down; it will not take as
long as you think. Continue to read the next page. You will see
that you’ll finish the second page in just 50% – 60% of the time
you spent for accomplishing the first page. Then, your reading
speed will increase dramatically after the first 5 to 10 pages. If
there is nothing special, after accomplishing about one third of
the book, you will be able to read seamlessly without checking
your dictionary at all or, at most, just very little. The reason is
that most of the words contained in a book repeat over and
over again.
Unfortunately, not many learners know this. I cannot remember
the number of students or friends of mine who borrowed my
English book to read, yet most of them never read to the third
page.
54They quit too early without knowing that success was waiting
for them right around the corner!
55CHAPTER FIVE
2 nd Input
The Sound - Mapping
Technique
“Language is the means of getting an idea from my brain into yours
without surgery.”
- MARK AMIDON
C
ongratulations! You have made it through almost half of
the journey!
I hope you have spent some amount of time practicing
the Free Reading technique. If so, you must have observed how
56quickly your vocabulary has been accumulating everyday. As
you practice, for the first few days, you will have to use your
dictionary like crazy. I had to check the word meaning for every
sentence. Sometimes, I even had to check two or three times
for just one sentence. Therefore, in the beginning, you may feel
a bit silly about what you are doing. Be patient and recall what I
have told you about the 3 steps to reading a book in your target
language. After about two weeks of practicing the Free Reading
technique, you will absolutely be thrilled by your progress.
In this chapter, I am going to share with you a listening
technique. This is probably the most expected section because
the listening skill seems to be a problem for every language
learner.
Just like you, I have gone through the uncomfortable
experience of trying to figure out what people were speaking on
the tapes for learning listening. I felt tired, bored and frustrated.
However, it does not have to be that way. Listening can be
much simpler and painless if we understand how our brain
works and have an appropriate approach.
Why can or can’t you hear what people speak?
In the chapter 3, I mentioned the “language map” in your brain.
There is both good and bad news about this. The bad news is
that there is a “text map” and a “sound map” located separately
somewhere in your brain. This is the reason why many learners
can read and write pretty well in their second language but are
very bad in speaking and listening. Now, you will have to accept
the fact that you must draw an additional “map” if you want to
be able to listen well.
The good news is that you can learn the listening skill in a way
similar to what we have done with the reading skill. The
difference here is that acquiring a language by reading is like
drawing the map with lines and signs. But acquiring it through
57listening is like drawing the map with real images. As you may
have noticed, sometimes we don’t need to remember street
names to drive without losing our way if we are familiar enough
with that area. The same mechanism works when people learn a
language. That is why kids can speak and listen before they
know how to write. Some linguists even designed courses in
which people learn a language purely by listening and speaking
without learning text. Pimsleur is one of the famous scholars in
this school. I once tried his course for Japanese. In my opinion,
it does work but takes quite a lot of time. I believe that his
approach will work very well if the learner is staying in an
environment surrounded by native speakers. It means the
method is appropriate for those who have a chance to interact
with native speakers everyday.
In the listening technique that I am going to share with you, you
will find that text is actually a good tool to shorten your learning
curve. However, before we go into the details of this method,
let’s go back to the question above: “why can or can’t you hear
what people speak?” To give you a hint, let’s think about the
times you have talked to someone who has a speech disorder.
As you may have noticed, if the person spoke your mother
tongue, chances are that you would have understood what he or
she said even though the words may not have been very clear.
Why would that be? You would say: “I could guess what he
said”. My question is: “why can’t you guess what a foreigner
says even if he or she speaks very clearly using words that you
have learned before?” The answer is: “in the first case, the
person with the speech disorder used the same words, phrases
and sentences that you have been hearing over and over again”.
So, the fact is that you cannot hear what you have
never heard before. That is the reason why trying to listen
to tapes containing many new words that learners have not
learned nor heard before is a waste of their time and effort.
If so, what is the mechanism here? When you listen to
something, your brain tries to recognize what you have just
heard. The language processing area compares and associates
the sound you have heard with the “source data”, which is the
58“sound language map” in your brain. To illustrate this process,
think about the work of the police when they screen through
the finger print source data to recognize the owner of a specific
fingerprint they want to identify. Sometimes, the fingerprint
they’ve got might be blurred or incomplete, yet the computer is
able to select the source datum which matches it the most.
What happens if the source data do not have any print that
matches the specific fingerprint? Well, in that case, the police do
not get to know the identity of the owner of the fingerprint yet.
They would have to call on another method.
If it is still not clear, think about when you’ve tried reading a
doctor’s handwriting. Your brain tries to screen through the
“standard word patterns” to recognize what is in the
prescription. Chances are that you will not be able to recognize
everything the doctor has written in it. However, as you bring
the prescription to the pharmacy, the pharmacists have no
problem recognizing every detail in it. Why is that? Is that
because the pharmacists have better eyes than yours? Absolutely
not; it is simply because pharmacists already know all types of
pills. They already have the “source data”.
A similar mechanism works when you are listening to a
language. If you don’t have the “sound map” yet, you won’t be
able to identify the sounds clearly and, therefore, the words. If
the “sound map” is not correct because you were taught by a
non-native speaker, the same thing happens. So, our strategy
here is to proactively build (draw) this map until the map is
clear.
The Sound - Mapping listening technique
With the method that I am going to share with you here, you
will be enjoying a painless and stress-free learning process. Since
the core idea of the technique is also based on the concept of
“massive input” and “selective acquisition”, you need to think
about where to get your input first.
59Where to get your listening material?
Similar to the Free Reading technique, you are not restricted to
any book or lecture. You are free to select any material that you
are interested in. The only thing you should note is that it
should come along with a transcript. When you read, you need a
dictionary to check the word meaning. Similarly, as you listen,
you need a transcript to check what you cannot hear. The
transcript here plays the role of a dictionary. Basically, you can
use one or more of the following sources:
1. Audio books and audio stories
Audio books are a common thing in the US, UK and countries
that speak major languages in the world, such as French,
Russian, etc. This is a great tool for learning a foreign language.
It is also handy as you can listen to it in your idle time, when
you are driving or waiting in a queue. To find an audio book
online, you need to know the words for “audio book” in the
language you want to learn. For me, since I was learning
English, I could use a search query, such as: “audio
book”+”business”, if I wanted to look for an audio book about
business. Or I could type “audio book”+”Harry Potter” if I
wanted to look for the Harry Potter audio stories.
2. Video or audio news
Although it is good listening to news on TV or radio, the
disadvantage of this source is that it does not have a transcript.
However, you can try searching on the Internet to find websites
that contain both clips/audio and its transcript.
3. Movies
Yes, you absolutely can practice your listening skills using
movies with subtitles in the target language. In this case, we
don’t have a transcript, but we can use the subtitles instead. Just
in case you don’t know, you can select the subtitle mode using
your remote control. For example, if you are learning Chinese,
buy a Chinese movie. Then select Chinese subtitle mode. Please
60note that you don’t want to listen to action movies because
conversations in it are often mixed with sound effects.
Movies have a big advantage because they contain a lot of
conversations, which are spoken by various voices. Practicing
with this type of material helps you get familiar with
conversations in the target language. However, practicing with
conversations alone is not enough. You still need to practice
with the various sources mentioned above.
Whatever listening material you are using, please note the two
following points:
- Please keep in mind that our strategy is based on the
concept of Massive Input. Therefore, your listening
materials should be at least 15 minutes in length.
- I don’t know which language you want to learn, but it
might contain more than one variant/dialect. For
example, in English, you have the American and British
variants. Do not try to learn two variants at a time; it
will confuse you and slow down your learning process.
How to practice the Sound - Mapping listening
technique?
In this section, I am going to describe the steps to practicing
your listening skills with a tape or any other type of audio, such
as a movie, online news, etc. Please do NOT skip any action.
Step 1: Listen to the first sentence; then imitate
exactly what the speaker said.
At this step, you probably cannot catch all the words yet. You
might not understand what the speaker said. However, just
ignore the meaning and imitate the sound like a parrot. At this
step, you don’t need to understand the meaning. You don’t
need to know which words the speaker is saying either. Just try
to repeat out loud what you can hear. There might be one or
two sounds, which are clearer than others. If so, focus on the
61clear sounds and ignore the blurred ones. You don’t need to
repeat many times; one time is enough. Sometimes, the sound
you hear is too hard to imitate. In that case, just go to Step 2.
At Step 1, you can work with 2 – 3 sentences at once if you feel
comfortable doing so. You can also rewind the tape to listen to
the sentence one more time but not more than two times in
total. Listening to it over and over again is a waste of time. I
usually listened only once. Please keep in mind the concept of
Massive Input; you need to cover more minutes of audio in a
short period of time to get as much input as possible.
Step 2: Look at your transcript to check the words.
If you’ve already caught what the speaker said, skip this step. In
case you are using a movie with subtitles in the target language,
watch it on your computer and drag the movie window a bit
lower to hide the subtitle for Step 1. After listening to a
sentence, maximize the movie window to see the subtitle and
check out the meaning.
62Step 3: Listen to the sentence again, repeat it out
loud and, at the same time, visualize its meaning.
At this step, you already understand the meaning of the
sentence as you checked it at Step 2. Do not look at the
transcript at this step! Normally, as you have just looked at the
script at Step 2, the text tends to pop up in your mind. You
need to dismiss the text and try to visualize its meaning with
your imagination. Try to think about what is happening
according to the sentence you have heard. For example, when I
was practicing English, as I heard the sentence: “he is walking
on the street”, I would try to imagine the following image:
63instead of the letters:
“H e
i s w a l k i n g o n
t h e
s t r e e t”
In the beginning, this technique could feel a little bit difficult for
you. But you will soon get familiar with it. Visualization is a
simple skill that basically everyone can do.
Similar to Step 1, you need to repeat out loud what you can
hear. Since this time you have already looked at the transcript,
you will feel more comfortable. However, please note that you
need to imitate the sound you hear, not read the transcript. It
means you follow the speaker exactly where he stresses a sound,
where he skips another sound, where he raises his voice, etc. In
short, REPEAT JUST LIKE A PARROT.
You can hear the sentence one or two more times if you like.
Again, just keep in mind Massive Input.
After finishing the first sentence, move on to the next one and
repeat the same 3 steps, and then the next... and so on until
you finish a paragraph. How long should this paragraph be? 5, 7
or 10 sentences? My answer is: it depends! It depends on how
long you can remember what the speaker has said. After
accomplishing one paragraph, you can move on to Step 4.
Step 4: Listen to the whole paragraph without
looking at the transcript while visualizing the
meaning.
64In this step, you will listen to the whole paragraph that you have
just heard (each sentence separately) again. While listening, try
to visualize; imagine the content that flows as the tape is
running. Do not look at the transcript! If there is a sentence that
you did not catch, just skip it. Just like in Step 3, you will try to
replace the text that tends to pop up in your mind with visual
images.
After finishing Step 4, you will move ahead to a new paragraph
and start with Step 1 again.
The magic of the Sound - Mapping technique
The first thing you realize is that you will get a large amount of
input for every 1- or 2-hour practice. Similar to the Free
Reading method, you will see the most common words and
phrases repeating over and over again, so you would have no
difficulty recognizing them. Further, these common words and
phrases will appear in different conversations, which means in
various contexts, and in different voices. This mechanism helps
you easily acquire the sound map of the language.
When you repeat out loud, it is like you are making the
sound bold in your mind. This helps you proactively create the
“sound map” quickly. Although speaking out loud when
studying a foreign language is recommended by many textbooks
and teachers, it is often overlooked by learners.
In Step 1, you need to imitate the sound before
checking your transcript, why? Normally, a learner will be
tempted to look at the script so that he is more comfortable at
repeating the sentence. However, doing so will prevent you
from pronouncing properly. As you look at the text, you will
tend to pronounce the words according to their appearance
rather than following exactly the speaker’s voice. In addition,
isolating sound from text will help you do the visualization in
Steps 3 and 4 more easily.
65By doing Step 3, you will gradually form a direct connection
between sound and meaning. Why is it so important? It is
because many language learners fall into the “indirect”
comprehension process when they are practicing their listening
skills. The “indirect” comprehension process can be described
as below:
Listen
Comprehend the meaning
(learner’s mind associates
language with vivid image
and sound)
Try to figure out the
words (text) that the
speaker said
Translate these words
into the learner’s
mother tongue
To make it clearer, let’s take a look at the example below in
which a Vietnamese is listening to English:
Learner hears
/'elifənt/
The text pops up in her mind
“Elephant”
She realizes the elephant’s image and
sound
She translates the word into
Vietnamese
“Elephant”=“con voi”
66The above figure illustrates the “indirect” comprehension
process in which the learner goes through a long process. In
“direct” comprehension, the process is much shorter as shown
below:
Learner hears
/'elifənt/
She realizes the elephant’s image and sound
As you can observe, in the “indirect” process, learners have to
use two tools, which are “text” and “mother language”, to
complete a listening comprehension section. This is the reason
why many people face obstacles listening to a long paragraph.
Many students tell me that they have no problem listening to
sentences individually, but they cannot catch up when we play
the whole paragraph at once. It is because while the leaner is
still digesting the first sentence, the tape has already moved to
the next one. The learner’s brain has spent a long time
processing the meaning of the first sentence so that he cannot
concentrate on listening to the next one.
In most people, the two “indirect” steps might gradually
disappear as they become more fluent in speaking and listening.
However, it will take them a very long time to erase these
“indirect” steps from their minds. Therefore, it is much better if
we do it properly right from the beginning. You will be able to
listen to and understand a long paragraph without having to
take notes.
67Be patient when practicing the Sound - Mapping technique; it may
take 1 – 2 days for you to get familiar with the steps.
Sometimes, if you feel tired after a long practice session, reward
yourself relaxation by watching TV in your target language. Or
you can let the tape run freely while you are doing some other
work. This technique is called “language bathing”. It helps
expose you more to the target language unconsciously.
However, you should take this “language bathing” as a
supplementary method; don’t take it as your main technique.
Because listening unconsciously will only have some minor
effect, it won’t help you much. You do need to spend time and
effort studying seriously in order to be successful.
Listening and Reading – a perfect couple
Before closing this chapter, one more thing you should note is
you can optimize the language acquisition process by practicing
both listening and reading on the same topic. That is why I
suggested you use materials like audio books, audio stories and
series of news articles.
Usually, your reading speed will be greater than your speed in
listening, so you should arrange appropriate chunks of time for
practicing the two skills. Depending on your needs, you can
decide to spend more time reading than listening or vice versa.
Either way, you should often alternate practicing the two skills
to maximize the learning effect.
Now, before continuing to read this book, grab your favorite
book, story, movie or whatever and start practicing it!